 
   
  
  
Traffic Operations Manual 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management 
Center Operations 

    
      
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Table of Contents February 2026 
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents..................................................................................................................110-i 
List of Tables.........................................................................................................................110-iii 
List of Figures .......................................................................................................................110-iv 
Section 1 Introduction ........................................................................................................ 110-1 
Topic 1 Preface............................................................................................................ 110-1 
Topic 2 History of Caltrans Transportation Management Centers .........................110-1 
Topic 3 Transportation Management Center Overview......................................... 110-2 
Topic 4 Transportation Management Center Statewide Organization ................110-3 
Topic 5 Hours of Operation ........................................................................................ 110-4 
Topic 6 Key Partners and Stakeholders..................................................................... 110-4 
Topic 7 Security Clearance for Transportation Management Center Personnel and 
Visitors Policy ................................................................................................................ 110-7 
Topic 8 Transportation Management Center Activities Administration ................110-8 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities ............................................................................... 110-10 
Topic 1 Overview....................................................................................................... 110-10 
Topic 2 System Operations Personnel ..................................................................... 110-10 
Topic 3 System Support Personnel ........................................................................... 110-13 
Topic 4 Traffic Management Team ......................................................................... 110-13 
Topic 5 Transportation Management Center Building Manager.........................110-14 
Topic 6 Transportation Management Center Staffing Administration.................110-14 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations ......................................... 110-19 
Topic 1 Overview....................................................................................................... 110-19 
Topic 2 Central Systems and Traffic Flow Monitoring ............................................ 110-19 
Topic 3 Incident Detection....................................................................................... 110-21 
Topic 4 Incident Verification .................................................................................... 110-25 
Topic 5 Incident Classification ................................................................................. 110-25 
Topic 6 Traffic Management Response .................................................................. 110-29 
Topic 7 Traffic Management Plans.......................................................................... 110-33 
Topic 8 Recurrent Congestion Management ........................................................ 110-36 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-i 
Traffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
   
  
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
  
 
   
   
   
Table of Contents February 2026 
Topic 9 Traveler Information ..................................................................................... 110-39 
Topic 10 California Highway Patrol Missing Person Alerts...................................... 110-42 
Topic 11 Traffic Data Analysis................................................................................... 110-44 
Topic 12 Snow Operations........................................................................................ 110-47 
Topic 13 Earthquake Monitoring.............................................................................. 110-48 
Section 4 Systems and Tools............................................................................................ 110-49 
Topic 1 Overview....................................................................................................... 110-49 
Topic 2 Reporting and Application Systems........................................................... 110-49 
Topic 3 Field Traffic Management System Elements ............................................. 110-52 
Topic 4 External Interfaces ....................................................................................... 110-56 
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management ....................... 110-57 
Topic 1 Overview....................................................................................................... 110-57 
Topic 2 Tenants or Partners Present in the Transportation Management Center ..110-
58 
Topic 3 Facility Manager Responsibilities ................................................................ 110-58 
Topic 4 Contract Procurement Resources for Facility Managers ........................110-63 
Topic 5 Facility Security ............................................................................................. 110-63 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-ii 
Traffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
 
   
   
   
    
 
List of Tables February 2026 
List of Tables 
Table 110-1 Icon Color Ranges ........................................................................................ 110-20 
Table 110-2 Icon Depiction of Traffic Patterns................................................................ 110-23 
Table 110-3 Incident Influences on Traffic Flow.............................................................. 110-23 
Table 110-4 Key Incident Characteristics From Incident Timeline ................................ 110-26 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-iii 
Traffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
 
List of Figures February 2026 
List of Figures 
Figure 110-1 Governor Ronald Reagan Visits the District 7 Traffic Operations Center.110-1 
Figure 110-2 Transportation Management Center Connections ................................. 110-19 
Figure 110-3 Incident Timeline .......................................................................................... 110-26 
Figure 110-4 Notification Process ..................................................................................... 110-32 
Figure 110-5 AMBER Alert Message Example.................................................................. 110-43 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-iv 
Traffic Operations Manual 
     
     
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
Section 1   Introduction  
Topic 1 Preface 
The purpose of this document is to provide guidelines on transportation management 
center (TMC) operations. This document guides TMC personnel on roles, responsibilities, 
operating procedures, systems, technology, and available resources for effective traffic 
management on the State Highway System (SHS). California Department of 
Transportation (Caltrans) personnel will use this document to improve TMC operations 
by standardizing operating procedures. 
Currently, operating capabilities, organization, and systems in use vary across the state. 
Thus, each TMC facility may have supplemental operating manuals, memos, or other 
guidance documents containing district-specific information. As we strive toward 
standardizing all infrastructure and operations, employees are encouraged to refer to 
their district procedure manuals as necessary to supplement this guidance. 
For additional information, refer to the Transportation Management Center Onramp 
web page. 
Topic 2 History of Caltrans Transportation 
Management Centers 
Caltrans and the California Highway Patrol (CHP) established the first Traffic Operations 
Center (TOC) in Los Angeles on November 23, 1971. In the following years, Caltrans’ 
transportation system management and CHP incident management programs 
continued to evolve. 
Figure 110-1 Governor Ronald Reagan Visits the District 7 Traffic Operations Center 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-1 
     
     
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
    
  
   
   
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
    
   
  
  
  
    
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
In April 1992, both departments signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on the 
development and operation of co-located TOCs. This agreement states that the co-
location of TOCs, the Caltrans maintenance communications center, and the CHP 
communications center benefits the public by supporting enhanced communication 
among departmental personnel, improving response to traffic incidents, and providing 
a more coordinated approach to traffic management. 
In the ensuing years, greater emphasis was placed on intermodal transportation, 
making it essential to create partnerships with local entities such as metropolitan 
planning organizations (MPOs) and local transit operators. 
Caltrans and CHP created the TMC Master Plan in June 1993 and revised it in 
December 1997. In it, an MOU adopted the TMC Master Plan as the standard for 
developing and operating all TMC facilities. To maintain consistency, the TMC Master 
Plan requires that TMC operations be defined with set standards. This chapter meets this 
objective. 
Topic 3 Transportation Management Center Overview 
TMCs allow Caltrans to accomplish the following: 
• Monitor and manage traffic flow. 
• Communicate traffic conditions to the traveling public. 
• Conduct traffic incident management (TIM). 
• Coordinate traffic management during emergencies or planned lane closures. 
The growing challenges of highway traffic congestion and the resulting increase in 
environmental impacts from greenhouse gas emissions have highlighted the need for 
continued innovative and cooperative efforts to enhance mobility on California’s 
highways. TMC operations play a critical role in achieving this goal. This section outlines 
the key functions that TMCs perform. 
Traffic Management 
TMCs are critical hubs for managing traffic that provide the public with the following 
benefits: 
• Improved safety through effective TIM, resulting in reduced secondary collisions. 
• Enhanced traveler mobility. 
• Reduced traffic congestion. 
• Reduced greenhouse gas emissions. 
• Reduced incident-related lane closure time. 
• Increased effectiveness of traveler information management, contributing to 
informed travel planning. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-2 
     
     
   
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
     
   
  
    
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
• Enhanced multi-agency emergency response coordination using state highway 
infrastructure. 
• A safer and more efficient multimodal highway system. 
• Increased regional economic activity. 
Traffic Incident Management 
Coordinated traffic management is a high priority for Caltrans TMC personnel and CHP. 
Both departments have agreed to joint responsibility for incident detection, verification, 
and management. However, Caltrans is primarily responsible for managing highway 
corridor systems impacted by incidents. CHP has jurisdiction over highway incident 
scene management and scene traffic control. The agreement on TMC joint operations 
can be found in the MOU for joint operational policies, which are periodically updated. 
For more information, refer to Chapter 130, “Traffic Incident Management.” 
Emergency Response Coordination 
TMCs support Caltrans emergency operation centers (EOCs), CHP, and other 
emergency response activities by leveraging TMC infrastructure, such as closed-circuit 
television (CCTV), highway advisory radio (HAR), changeable message signs (CMSs), or 
the California Highway Information Network (CHIN). If an emergency results in a full 
closure requiring an alternate route, coordination with the appropriate public agencies 
(including CHP and Caltrans field personnel) and any involved private sector entities will 
be necessary. If the incident requires emergency repair or specialized maintenance 
services, these contacts may also need to be made through the TMC. Such emergency 
services include electrical maintenance, structure maintenance, municipal or private 
utility services, or private sector entities under the listing of contacts. A list of contacts 
from all areas shall be maintained at the TMC. 
Topic 4 Transportation Management Center Statewide 
Organization 
Caltrans operates 12 district TMCs throughout the state and 1 satellite TMC. 
Standalone and California Highway Patrol Co-Located Transportation 
Management Centers 
Five TMCs, located in Districts 3, 7, 8, 11, and 12, are standalone facilities co-located 
with CHP. Both CHP and Caltrans TMC operators, dispatchers, and managers provide 
integrated transportation management and improve highway system performance. 
These secure co-located TMCs are where Caltrans staff have full access to the CHP 
VisiCAD for more effective TIM functions. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-3 
     
     
   
  
 
    
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
      
    
 
 
 
  
  
     
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
Other District Transportation Management Centers 
The remaining seven TMCs, located in Districts 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, and 10, are positioned 
within Caltrans district buildings and are managed only by Caltrans personnel. Activities 
are coordinated as needed with CHP offices and CHP command centers. Some of 
these separated TMCs only have access to a limited and redacted CHP Media 
Computer-Aided Dispatch (CAD), while others have full access to CHP VisiCAD. 
Satellite Operations Centers 
Satellite operations centers (SOCs) are fixed facilities for the seasonal management of 
snow operations, recreational traffic, seasonal peaks, weather restrictions, and any 
other major highway incident. SOCs are activated through an area-specific response 
procedure and may be set up anywhere. 
SOC responsibilities include: 
• Managing unusual situations, snow operations, seasonal peak activity, dust 
storms, environmental disasters, or any other transportation emergencies. 
• Coordinating with other TMCs. 
• Opening only as needed with sufficient staffing and equipment. 
Currently, Caltrans operates one SOC at the Kingvale Maintenance Station in District 3. 
Topic 5 Hours of Operation 
Some TMCs (Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12) operate 24 hours, while District 5 
operates on weekdays from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
TMC personnel work in shifts, with staff working a 5-day/40-hour week, a 4-day/10-hour 
week, or a 9-day/80-hour biweekly schedule based on specific TMC operational and 
staffing needs. Exact start and end times, shift durations, and shift overlaps vary by 
district according to MOUs and district-specific needs and requirements. 
Shift designations for TMCs operating 24 hours are known as the “day shift” (typically 
06:00-14:00), the “swing shift” (typically 14:00-22:00), and the “graveyard shift” (typically 
22:00-6:00).” Shift designations for TMCs operating less than 24 hours are generally 
known as the “a.m. shift” and the “p.m. shift.” 
Topic 6 Key Partners and Stakeholders 
To keep pace with the expanding role of TMCs in transportation system management, 
partnerships with stakeholders are critical for effectively meeting the needs of the 
public. These partnerships address a variety of issues, such as funding, system operations 
and maintenance, technology development and implementation, public information, 
and resource sharing. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-4 
     
     
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
The steady growth of transportation-related challenges, such as congestion and delays, 
establishes the need for continued efforts to maximize the efficiency of existing 
transportation facilities. Creating partnerships with public and private entities is 
important in meeting the needs of transportation users, adopting new technologies, 
and overcoming resource shortages. The goal of partnerships is to integrate private 
sector technological advances with current academic research to address the 
transportation needs of different regions in an innovative way. 
Caltrans and CHP have partnered on several initiatives for managing traffic on state 
highways, particularly through developing and deploying personnel in state TMCs. The 
two agencies have agreed that co-location and cooperation benefit the public by 
enhancing communication between departments, improving response times to 
incidents, and improving traffic management coordination. 
The following is a brief overview of some of the stakeholders involved in TMC operations 
and their roles. 
Caltrans 
Caltrans is responsible for SHS management, incident response, planned lane closures, 
and special events affecting the SHS. Caltrans recognizes that quick incident removal 
and return to normal operations saves lives and reduces congestion and potential 
injuries. Caltrans provides real-time traveler information and coordinates incident 
response with CHP and partner agencies. Caltrans also plans, designs, constructs, 
operates, and maintains the SHS. 
California Highway Patrol 
CHP is responsible for state highway incident management, emergency road closures, 
law enforcement, and maintenance of CHP automated computer systems. CHP also 
provides motorist safety services and traffic supervision. CHP’s law enforcement 
activities maintain the dynamic operations of the SHS, maximize safety, and assist other 
law enforcement agencies. 
Metropolitan Planning Organizations 
In urban areas, partnerships with MPOs help identify needs, prioritize strategies, develop 
integrated multimodal transportation, gain public support, and secure funding for 
transportation projects. MPOs are responsible for developing the blueprint for mass 
transit, highway, airport, seaport, and railroad facilities. 
Regional transportation agencies coordinate on managed lane dynamic pricing 
events, lane incidents, and message coordination that affect express lane operations 
and general-purpose lanes. 
Local Agency Transportation Management Centers 
In corridor traffic management efforts, interconnections are implemented between 
Caltrans-operated and local TMCs (TMCs owned and operated by cities and counties). 
Traffic management activities should use all available transportation system capacity 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-5 
     
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
within an entire corridor. State and local officials must be able to communicate and 
coordinate to provide effective corridor management. 
Local Emergency Responders 
Local emergency responders help coordinate an efficient response to incidents on the 
SHS and provide emergency services to the impacted public. 
Local Mass Transit 
Transit operators such as buses, trains, or ferries are important in making transit ridership 
a viable alternative to automobile travel. Real-time information (provided to and from 
transit vehicles) allows for vehicle tracking, alternate routing, fleet management, 
passenger and fare management, maintenance, and security. Additionally, transit 
vehicles can report the transportation system’s condition to the TMC. 
Academic Institutions 
Partnerships with academic institutions are an important part of developing 
transportation management strategies for the present and future. Academic institutions 
examine, evaluate, and advance available traffic systems technology through 
research that addresses current issues while training future professionals for this growing 
field. 
Media and Online Platforms 
Partnerships with the media play a critical role in providing accurate information to the 
public. It is vital to provide real-time traffic information to the largest possible public 
audience. This is achieved using commercial radio, television, social media, online news 
and maps, and global positioning system platforms. TMC personnel must follow 
established policies and protocols for communicating with the media. 
Federal Highway Administration 
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) provides the means for funding, 
demonstrating, and implementing advanced transportation systems (ATSs). Partnering 
with FHWA allows Caltrans to stay informed and influence issues surrounding the 
national transportation Traffic Management System (TMS) environment. 
Private Entities 
Developing partnerships with the private sector fosters advancements in ATS. These 
partnerships allow collaboration on transportation and information system projects that 
need testing, evaluation, and implementation. Partnerships with private entities support 
technology and resource sharing and are mutually beneficial. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-6 
     
     
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
    
  
 
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
Topic 7 Security Clearance for Transportation 
Management Center Personnel and Visitors Policy 
All Caltrans employees, service providers, and guests who enter the operating floor of a 
TMC that has CHP VisiCAD must either (a) be escorted at all times while in the TMC to 
ensure that they are not exposed to confidential law enforcement information, or (b) 
undergo a California Department of Justice (DOJ) background check and sign CHP 
Form 101A, “Agreement With Outside Entities to Establish Remote Access Privileges to 
CHP Automated Computer Systems and Information” (Form CHP 101A) to have 
unescorted access. This policy has been in place since 1995 and applies to all Caltrans 
personnel, including janitorial or maintenance staff working on the TMC floor, without 
exception. 
If the TMC fails to comply with this security policy, CAD access can be removed from 
the TMC. This would hinder Caltrans’ ability to manage traffic and incidents. Applicants 
for positions in CAD-equipped TMCs should have ample notice of the information 
security policy both before and after they apply for a position. 
As a primary law enforcement agency, CHP subscribes to the California Law 
Enforcement Telecommunications System (CLETS). CLETS was designed to provide law 
enforcement agencies with confidential information. The DOJ is responsible for 
providing CLETS service and monitoring and regulating access to CLETS information. 
All individuals with access to CLETS information are required to undergo a security 
clearance to determine their suitability for access. Since all Caltrans employees working 
in a TMC may have the opportunity to view CLETS information on CAD screens or record 
printouts, a joint policy was developed to require that background checks be 
performed on all TMC personnel. 
The CLETS Policies, Practices, and Procedures Manual requires that any person who has 
access to CLETS information be fingerprinted and subjected to a DOJ security 
clearance. Each applicant’s background check requires both DOJ and Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI). Caltrans 
Headquarters (HQ) Division of Traffic Operations is responsible for establishing an 
interagency contract with DOJ for Live Scan fingerprint services and billing. Refer to 
“Live Scan Interagency Agreement with the Department of Justice” for more 
information. 
Additionally, each Caltrans employee working in a TMC will be required to sign CHP 
Form 101A and an interagency MOU. Form 101A and the MOU inform employees of the 
confidentiality of CLETS information and the CLETS system and include a brief statement 
of the penalties imposed for its misuse (see Appendix 110 A). Confidential automated 
information obtained from CHP VisiCAD and CLETS shall be used exclusively for the 
official business of the state. CHP VisiCAD and CLETS information cannot be shared with 
any unauthorized person. Misuse of information from CAD or CLETS may result in 
suspension or loss of employment and prosecution for state and federal crimes. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-7 
     
     
   
  
  
 
 
 
     
  
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
As a primary subscriber to CLETS, CHP takes responsibility for ensuring that TMC 
personnel who have access to CLETS comply with DOJ security rules and regulations. 
TMCs that are co-located or have CAD access are required to comply with these 
guidelines. Noncompliance can result in increased departmental liability, individual 
employee liability, and the potential loss of CHP access to the CLETS system. 
Live Scan Interagency Agreement with the Department of Justice 
The Live Scan contract is an interagency agreement with the DOJ to submit fingerprint 
images and related information electronically and have the DOJ provide Caltrans with 
DOJ and FBI fingerprint Live Scan information. Caltrans will request this information 
electronically by completing form BCIA 8016, "Request for Live Scan Service" with the 
originating agency identifier A1582 entered in the form field labeled “ORI.” The DOJ is 
responsible for receiving and processing the Caltrans requests. The DOJ shall provide 
Caltrans with the following information: 
• DOJ or a no-record response and (if authorized) subsequent arrest notifications. 
• FBI or a no-record response for initial submissions. 
• Child Abuse Central Index. 
• Peace Officer Carry Concealed Weapon. 
Topic 8 Transportation Management Center Activities 
Administration 
Audio or video recording inside the TMC is prohibited unless explicitly authorized under 
a Caltrans- and CHP-approved agreement (such as a Live Commercial Broadcasting 
MOU) and conducted from designated areas with information security safeguards. 
Training captures or screenshots must adhere to CHP and CLETS privacy rules and 
internal policies. However, it is recommended that TMC operations personnel maintain 
records of specific activities to provide an organized format for recording various events 
and a convenient means to retrieve key pieces of information involved in the daily 
activities of the TMC. TMC operations personnel should maintain records of the following 
activities: 
• Radio communications. 
• Equipment usage (such as CMS, HAR, or CHIN). 
• Incident occurrences. 
• Major incidents. 
• Incident notifications and callouts. 
• Lane or road closures. 
• Other miscellaneous occurrences. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-8 
     
     
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
Section 1 Introduction February 2026 
• Ongoing traffic management activities. 
• Special situations (such as chain control, Sigalerts*, or traffic advisories). 
• Major issues that need to be relayed to the following shift. 
• Equipment malfunctions. 
• Status of repair efforts. 
• Summary of road conditions. 
• Ongoing travel restrictions. 
• Weather conditions that affect travel (such as 10-13 reports completed daily 
during the winter season). 
Note*: Sigalerts are issued for unplanned major incidents that affect one or more lanes 
and will block the roadway for at least 30 minutes, causing congestion and delay. CHP 
issues Sigalerts either from the TMC or from the CHP communications center. Examples 
of Sigalerts may include congestion-causing traffic incidents, spilled loads, leaking gas, 
or special events. 
Major Issues to Relay to the Following Shift 
TMCs should have a method for providing information to the next shift concerning 
ongoing activities or major incidents that have cleared but may still need an 
explanation, such as any administrative issues, contact or coordination problems, office 
and field system failures, or any other major issues and highlights of TMC activities. 
Transportation Management Center Equipment Malfunction Report 
Maintain a report of all equipment failures that occur during a TMC shift. This report may 
be used to notify TMC support personnel of the equipment problem, the time of 
occurrence, and the exact nature of what is not functioning in its normal manner. The 
TMC Equipment Malfunction Report may also be used to track the status of repair 
efforts and the return to full operation upon completion of repairs. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-9 
       
     
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
       
 
  
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Section 2  Roles and Responsibilities  
Topic 1 Overview 
TMC operations are managed by TMC functional managers, performed by operators 
and dispatchers, and supported by several other personnel. This chapter summarizes 
TMC personnel roles and duties. Individuals listed below may perform multiple functions 
during their day within a TMC. The number of personnel and roles vary depending on 
the TMC size. 
As described in Section 1, Topic 7 “Security Clearance for Transportation Management 
Center Personnel and Visitors Policy,” TMC personnel with unescorted access to the 
TMC operating floor where CHP VisiCAD is accessible are subject to DOJ background 
checks and fingerprinting. Confidential automated information obtained from CHP 
VisiCAD and CLETS shall be used exclusively for the official business of the State. CHP 
VisiCAD and CLETS information cannot be shared with any unauthorized person. Misuse 
of information from CAD or CLETS may result in suspension or loss of employment and 
prosecution for state and federal crimes. 
Topic 2 System Operations Personnel 
Transportation Management Center Functional Managers 
The TMC functional manager oversees the TMC operations, staff, and building. The main 
roles and responsibilities may include: 
• Supervising traffic operations, incident response, and facilitating the safe and 
efficient operation of the SHS and TMC work environment. 
• Communicating the TMC operational needs and activities to all internal and 
external stakeholders as needed. 
• Training technical staff. 
• Maximizing public safety and minimizing motorist delays that result from incidents 
and congestion. Analyzing incidents, providing engineering judgment, and 
communicating information to field staff and the traveling public to assist with 
making informed decisions. 
• Overseeing maintenance and identifying future needs of TMC operational 
elements and the TMC building. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-10 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
  
 
    
 
     
      
    
   
 
     
  
      
 
   
 
    
  
  
 
    
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
    
 
  
 
   
   
   
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Transportation Management Center Lead Worker 
The lead worker oversees the technical operations of the TMC floor, such as incident 
management and the Advanced Transportation Management System (ATMS). The 
main roles and responsibilities include: 
• Directing and overseeing the day-to-day operations of the district TMC. 
• Directing and supporting major traffic incident clearance and investigations. 
• Reviewing and examining major incidents. 
• Monitoring and analyzing real-time traffic data to provide support where 
needed. 
• Preparing and reviewing traveler information messages for various devices, such 
as CMSs and HARs. 
• Working closely with the traffic management team (TMT) for traffic-related 
activities and responses. 
• Performing traffic engineering calculations and traffic delay and reduction 
methodologies to provide independent engineering decisions. 
• Participating in staff meetings with the Division of Maintenance, CHP partners, or 
both for traffic operational awareness. 
Transportation Management Center Operators and Dispatchers 
TMC operators and dispatchers work together to monitor traffic operations and 
manage incidents on the SHS. The following lists the main roles and responsibilities of 
operators and dispatchers. 
Operators 
• Actively monitoring traffic information sources such as CCTV, QuickMap, CHP 
VisiCAD, and CHP MediaCAD for traffic incident identification, verification, and 
response. 
• Communicating and coordinating with field personnel and incident response 
units for incident response and traffic management activities. 
• Notifying designated personnel and agencies of major incidents, traffic 
restrictions, emergency response, and roadway conditions or closures. 
• Coordinating responses with other TMCs and agencies if an incident has regional 
impacts. 
• Providing traffic updates and messages by CMS, CHIN, and HAR. 
• Ensuring traveler information messages are accurate and timely, and relaying 
updated information to CHP and partner agencies. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-11 
Tr
affic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
     
 
 
    
 
  
    
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Dispatchers  
•  Inputting data and maintaining reports of TMC activities.  
•  Inputting Lane Closure Status into  the LCS system.  
•  Managing  communications between TMC  and  maintenance  field personnel.  
•  Generating  and maintaining  Integrated Maintenance Management System  
(IMMS)  service requests for maintenance activities.  
•  Providing  timely response to CHP requests for field  maintenance assistance.  
•  Providing  ongoing chain restriction status through  Transportation  Management 
Center Activity Logging (TMCAL)  or ActiveITS, and  updating  the HQ 
Communications  Center.  
Other System Operations Personnel 
The following is a list of other system operations personnel and a description of their role. 
Integrated corridor coordinator: Monitors traffic and incident data on the highway and 
local streets within the limits of the integrated corridor. 
Ramp metering engineer: Monitors and adjusts ramp metering modes and rates and 
their effect on traffic flow to provide maximum operational efficiency on highways and 
local street systems. 
District traffic manager: Coordinates with personnel to develop and implement 
transportation management plans (TMPs). Responsible for the day-to-day decisions 
about traffic impacts from planned activities on the SHS. 
Traffic signal system engineer: Interacts with incident response and planned lane 
closure personnel to coordinate traffic management response activities involving signal 
re-timing. 
Headquarters Communications Center 
The primary function of the Headquarters Communications Center (HCC) is to receive 
and distribute accurate information from the TMCs regarding the status of the SHS. The 
HCC must receive timely information and updates regarding every reportable incident 
that will affect the public use of any state highway or Caltrans facility. For more 
information, refer to the Highway Condition Report Requirements (HCRR) available on 
Onramp. 
The HCC advises the California State Transportation Agency, the Governor's Office of 
Emergency Services (CalOES), the Caltrans director and chief deputy director, 
statewide deputy directors, designated staff, as well as the Caltrans emergency 
management coordinator, designated division chiefs and office chiefs, and the FHWA. 
In addition, the HCC informs and advises the public through CHIN and QuickMap. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-12 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Topic 3 System Support Personnel 
The normal work location for system support personnel may be either within the TMC 
control room or in other adjacent rooms specifically designated for support functions. 
The following is a list of system support staff and a description of their role. 
Database administrator: Manages, monitors, verifies, retrieves, and archives historical 
data. Supports disaster recovery and planning, data backup policies, and data 
restoration policies. 
System administrator: Configures the operating system, updates system software, and 
manages user accounts, devices, space usage, network services, and system security. 
Traffic data analyst: Provides baseline traffic data and runs summary reports for traffic 
data, ramp metering, and traffic system performance. 
System electrical engineers: Troubleshoots electronic equipment and computer system 
software to correct system malfunctions and keep the system running at full capability. 
May also perform planning and design reviews for TMS Systems. 
Communications engineer: Troubleshoots communications equipment to correct 
communication outages and keep the communications network running reliably. 
Interacts with vendors, contractors, and leased telecommunication service providers for 
installing or modifying the communications network. 
Field maintenance technicians: Troubleshoots and repairs field equipment, keeping the 
system operating as intended. 
Field maintenance liaison: Interacts with system operators to coordinate with field 
maintenance personnel who respond to incidents. 
Topic 4 Traffic Management Team 
Most districts have a TMT or major incident response team or both, consisting of staff 
with specialized truck-mounted CMSs geared to respond to major incidents and special 
events in coordination with TMC staff. These teams implement traffic management 
strategies to reduce delays, prevent secondary collisions, and improve mobility and 
safety. The staffing-level classification ranges from maintenance employees to 
engineers. The core group has full-time job assignments in either the incident or special 
event response unit or the planned lane closure unit. This primary group responds to 
most situations that occur during normal work hours. The remaining TMT members have 
full-time job assignments in other functions and act as volunteers on an as-needed 
basis. 
As the number of personnel varies depending on the size of the district, team members 
include a TMT leader, a TMT spotter, and TMT sign truck operators. At the incident scene 
(command post), the team leader coordinates with other first responders to manage 
traffic incident response procedures. The TMT provides traffic management assistance 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-13 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
without duplicating the efforts of CHP and maintenance personnel. Team functions 
include: 
• Providing end-of-queue protection to oncoming traffic to prevent secondary 
incidents. 
• Providing advance notification to travelers of road closures, blockages, and 
lengthy delays, where necessary. 
• Providing detour and alternate route signing as appropriate. 
• Maintaining communications with TMC staff and providing updates on changing 
traffic conditions for district staff and HCC. 
• Assisting with maintenance and construction activities, which may cause delays 
to the traveling public. 
Topic 5 Transportation Management Center Building 
Manager 
The roles and responsibilities of the TMC building manager include: 
• Ensuring TMC facilities are operational and compliant with all local and state 
laws, codes, and regulations relating to health and safety. 
• Managing TMC facility maintenance, operations, and repairs in an efficient, 
cost-effective, and prompt manner. 
• Coordinating facility maintenance, operations, and repairs with CHP and the 
Department of General Services (DGS). 
Topic 6 Transportation Management Center Staffing 
Administration 
Positions at TMCs may be filled under several classifications depending on district needs 
and staffing structures. Typical classifications include Transportation Engineering 
Technician, Analyst I, and Analyst II. These classifications provide flexibility to staff TMCs 
with personnel who have the appropriate technical, analytical, or administrative 
expertise. 
All TMC personnel are required to perform their duties professionally and efficiently to 
best serve the public. All TMC personnel shall establish and continue to foster good 
working relationships with CHP to improve cooperative and coordinated efforts while 
performing TMC duties. Communications with external and internal partners (such as 
CHP, field maintenance personnel, private information service providers (ISPs), public 
affairs staff, HQ staff, and others) will be handled in a timely fashion while demonstrating 
a professional attitude, good work ethic, and respect toward others. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-14 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
     
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Reporting for Duty and Shift Management 
All TMC personnel shall report to work on time and be prepared for a briefing at the 
start of their assigned shift. All personnel shall immediately report directly to their 
assigned positions and relieve the previous shift. 
Caltrans 
Caltrans personnel shall report directly to the TMC at the beginning of their respective 
shifts. 
Caltrans policy and MOUs in force will determine the method of overtime 
compensation. Overtime scheduling will be based on the need to effectively manage 
the TMC operations. Shifts will be offered to employees based on equitable overtime 
distribution and staff availability. All overtime requires the TMC supervisor’s prior 
approval. 
Before the monthly schedule is completed, TMC personnel will be given a preliminary 
schedule with the days on which overtime will be needed. If no employees volunteer 
for overtime work, the supervisor may ask other staff members within operations to fill 
the need. 
All TMC personnel shall be assigned to a specific shift at the discretion of district 
management. Each person may state a preference for the shift they are interested in 
working. Shift assignments will be based on the needs of TMC operations. Preference 
may be based on the time of service within the TMC. Duplicate requests for shift 
assignments are processed by TMC management using seniority within the TMC 
classification and are consistent with MOUs and operational coverage requirements. 
If one of the TMC personnel leaves the TMC resulting in a vacancy, the remaining 
personnel may request assignment to the shift with the opening immediately after the 
position becomes vacant. However, the selection process will also be based on the 
needs of the TMC. 
California Highway Patrol 
CHP personnel shall report directly to the TMC at the beginning of their respective shifts. 
Shift coverage by CHP personnel for TMCs operating 24 hours per day generally consists 
of three shifts, known as the “A Watch” shift, the “B Watch” shift, and the “C Watch” 
shift. The officers assigned to the TMC are accountable to and under the direct 
supervision of the CHP traffic management unit (TMU) commander. They assist in 
coordinating the responsibilities of CHP, Caltrans, and other allied agencies in manual 
and electronic traffic monitoring and in handling emergency incidents. 
CHP personnel shall complete a CHP 415 Form online and submit it to the TMU 
commander each day. All overtime requires the TMU commander’s approval before 
being worked. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-15 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Uniforms  
Caltrans 
W
hile no uniform is prescribed for TMC operations personnel, employees should dress 
appropriately for a professional office setting. Caltrans identification badges shall 
always be worn in plain view inside the TMC facility. 
California Highway Patrol 
Uniformed members shall always wear a long-sleeve shirt and necktie while on duty, 
except: 
• A short-sleeved shirt may be worn from April 1 through October 31. 
• TMC commander may authorize CHP personnel to wear appropriate civilian 
attire, as necessary. 
Firearms  
Caltrans 
C
altrans personnel shall follow Caltrans policy regarding firearms as detailed in Deputy 
Directive 022-R4 on Weapons Prohibited. 
California Highway Patrol 
• Uniformed members shall comply with CHP departmental policy regarding 
firearms. Firearms shall be left in a secure location when not on the officer’s 
person. 
• When not in uniform, CHP personnel shall wear proper identification or CHP 
departmental badges in plain view while inside the TMC and surrounding facility. 
Shift Briefing 
At the beginning of a new shift, it is imperative to share information regarding what 
occurred in the previous shift. This shift briefing can be done informally and must cover 
the following subjects as appropriate. 
Current System Status 
Inform the next shift about which signs are in use and their messages, as well as any 
closure information on the district-specific platform. Report all malfunctions to the 
system support personnel and keep the record in the district-specific platform. Also, 
notify the following shift of any malfunctions that may impair the TMC’s effectiveness. 
Active Incidents 
Keep the incident status board updated. Inform the following shift of the status of any 
active incidents that are occurring, especially if any TMC equipment is in use. This will 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-16 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
help to avoid giving false information. An example of this would be leaving CMS 
messages up after an incident is cleared. 
Special Events 
Special events are usually planned, and the TMT may develop an oral or written 
response plan in consultation with the event representative. Include any existing 
response plans in the shift briefing to avoid confusion when an event occurs. 
Special Instructions 
Examples of special instructions include turning on a CMS at a scheduled time for 
purposes such as traffic studies, public information, or media updates, notifying about 
scheduled TMC tours, or informing system support personnel of planned work that may 
affect TMC operations. 
Caltrans Personnel Leave Reporting Requirements 
Vacation Leave 
TMC operations personnel should inform their supervisor in writing at least one month in 
advance to request any vacation leave of one week or longer in duration. This is 
necessary to arrange the schedule so that other personnel can be scheduled to cover 
the shift. 
Vacation leave of less than one week should be requested at least one week in 
advance so that the schedule can be arranged accordingly. 
In cases where two or more employees apply for time off during the same period, 
priority will be given to the individual with the highest seniority in the TMC branch. 
Seniority will not nullify the approved vacation of junior staff. 
Sick Leave 
Illnesses that prevent an employee from coming to work should be reported at least 
two hours before the beginning of their shift. The employee shall notify their supervisor 
by telephone. If there is no supervisor available, the employee may leave a message 
with their alternate supervisor. Depending on the nature and duration of the illness, a 
doctor’s note may be required. A courtesy phone call to the TMC floor to alert staff 
immediately of the impending shift vacancy shall also be made. 
During non-business hours, weekends, and holidays, illnesses that prevent an employee 
from coming to work should be reported at least four hours before the beginning of an 
employee’s shift. The employee may contact the TMC and leave a message for their 
supervisor with the lead worker on duty. 
Sick leave requests due to medical or dental appointments for the employee or the 
employee's family shall be reported to the supervisor at least two days in advance. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-17 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
       
     
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Section 2 Roles and Responsibilities February 2026 
Jury Duty 
To maintain staffing needs and to assist in scheduling changes, an employee that 
receives a jury duty notification shall advise their supervisor as soon as their first 
notification is received. Employees should follow the rules in their union contract MOU 
for leave and time reporting for jury duty. 
Emergencies 
When an emergency arises, the affected employee should contact their supervisor and 
the TMC floor operator as soon as possible, provide as much detail as is available, and 
provide the expected duration of the emergency. Each case will be evaluated 
individually, and every effort will be made to accommodate the needs of the 
employee. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-18 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
      
     
   
    
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
    
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center 
Operations 
Topic 1 Overview 
TMCs are the focal point for many different transportation-related functions and 
operations. As illustrated in Figure 110-2, TMCs are the center for monitoring real-time 
traffic operations on the SHS. TMCs provide system personnel with the tools and 
resources to communicate and manage transportation operations safely and 
efficiently from a central facility. This section discusses the operational resources and 
procedures used within a TMC. 
Figure 110-2 Transportation Management Center Connections 
Topic 2 Central Systems and Traffic Flow Monitoring 
One of the TMC’s primary functions is routinely monitoring traffic flow. Observing unusual 
patterns of reduced speed, congestion, or other abnormalities in the usual flow may 
indicate a traffic flow constriction. This may be caused by a temporary reduction in 
capacity due to an incident, lane closure, or excessive demand. 
Effective traffic flow monitoring involves paying constant attention to the highway 
system using various tools in the TMC, such as CHP VisiCAD, Caltrans radio, CCTV, 
QuickMap, and Google Maps. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-19 
      
     
   
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
  
  
 
  
Table 110-1 Icon Color Ranges 
Icon Color Speed in mph 
Red < 20 
Yellow/Orange => 20 < 35 
Green => 35 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Traffic Flow Data 
The basic tool for obtaining traffic flow information is a detector sensor system. In 
general, this system consists of remote electronic sensors contained within or adjacent 
to a highway, which relay traffic data over a communication system to a TMC central 
processing location. 
Caltrans uses the following types of traffic detection sensors: 
• Inductive loop 
• Magnetic detectors 
• Microwave radar 
• Video detection 
• Thermal image detection 
• Piezo 
• Bluetooth or Wi-Fi 
• Third-party data (such as WAZE, HERE, INRIX, Google, or TomTom) 
These sensors relay data that quantifies traffic volumes, occupancy, and vehicle speed 
separated by direction and lane. Summary reports for traffic data are compiled and 
produced using a central computational processor located within a TMC. The central 
computer generates traffic data summaries compiled in various formats and displayed 
as either textual or numerical values or graphical depictions. Traffic data review and 
interpretation can reveal the exact locations and even the nature of observed traffic 
flow abnormalities. 
Graphical Display 
Graphics are used to visualize real-time traffic conditions on a monitor, large projection 
screen, or video wall. The highway electronic detection system is displayed using a 
series of green, yellow/orange, and red-light icons along the highways represented on 
the graphics display screen. An example of colors associated with estimated vehicle 
speeds is shown in Table 110-1. Graphics may indicate an incident as described in 
“Surveillance System and Graphics Display.” 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-20 
      
     
   
  
   
 
 
  
     
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Note: Color ranges vary by district. 
Monitoring Recurrent Congestion, Planned Lane Closures, or Special 
Events 
Whenever traffic congestion is anticipated, such as for planned lane closures, special 
events, or even the normal daily recurrent commuter congestion, it is necessary to 
monitor the extent of congestion. The purpose of monitoring congestion is to discern 
any unusual patterns that may indicate the presence of a secondary problem within 
the traffic queue. This may include moving traffic to different routes with the assistance 
of allied agencies due to abnormally extended delays from the anticipated traffic 
congestion. Traffic surveillance device checks should be made at frequent intervals. 
Topic 3 Incident Detection 
Another TMC function is traffic incident detection. Detection can occur based on 
information received from various sources, as outlined in this topic. 
California Highway Patrol Computer-Aided Dispatch Sources 
CAD, the computerized log operated by CHP, contains information collected from 
cellular 911 emergency calls, roadside motorist call boxes, CHP field patrol units, 
airborne surveillance, or public telephone calls received at CHP communication 
centers. 
TMCs primarily receive incident information details through CHP VisiCAD by monitoring 
the CHP VisiCAD terminal. Added information may be received directly from members 
of CHP dispatch, if they are present in the TMC, to help verify the severity of an incident 
by coordinating with the TMC liaison officer. The CHP communications center will issue 
Sigalerts and traffic advisories and coordinate with the TMC by obtaining details of the 
incident and the status of response efforts at the incident scene. 
TMC operations personnel should continually interact with all CAD-generated logs that 
may affect transportation management. 
Cellular 911 
Cellular 911 calls are answered by the appropriate dispatch, which includes city 
dispatches and the CHP communications center in the area. When answered by a CHP 
communications center, a service operator initiates a CAD log identifying the incident. 
CAD automatically routes the log to the dispatcher, who then contacts the CHP patrol 
unit to potentially respond. 
CHP Patrol Units 
CHP patrol units usually receive radio calls to respond to incidents that may affect 
traffic. Once the CHP officer arrives at the scene, the officer assumes incident scene 
management and verifies the details and severity of the incident. If necessary, the 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-21 
      
     
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
officer may request the appropriate emergency service personnel and equipment. The 
officer may initiate a Sigalert or traffic advisory, and Caltrans may be notified to 
respond. 
Airborne Surveillance 
Airborne surveillance is also used to detect and verify incidents. CHP fixed-wing or 
helicopter aircraft may arrive at a scene before ground units and expedite incident 
verification. Airborne surveillance is particularly useful in rural areas. A CHP aircraft may 
land at the scene and assume scene management responsibilities until ground units 
arrive. 
Freeway Service Patrol 
The Freeway Service Patrol (FSP) is a fleet of tow trucks that circle continuously on fixed 
travel routes, known as “patrol beats.” FSP is intended to provide early detection and 
rapid removal of minor incidents, such as a stalled vehicle blocking a lane or a disabled 
vehicle stranded on the shoulder. FSP will also fix a flat tire, supply gasoline, restart a 
vehicle, or tow a vehicle to a safe location off the highway. FSP services are always free 
of charge to motorists. FSP tow trucks are active during commute times on Monday 
through Friday, with selected routes also working outside of the normal peak traffic 
periods, including midday, night, and weekend operations. 
CHP trains FSP drivers to recognize and remove vehicles and objects that cause slowing 
on the SHS. FSP drivers also discover many impediments while on patrol, receive 
directions from CHP dispatchers, and are supervised in the field by CHP officers. 
Freeway Service Patrol Dispatch 
Dispatchers obtain data from CHP officers, cellular phones, call boxes, and FSP units. 
This information is routed to the FSP dispatcher on the CAD system through the dispatch 
office. Similarly, FSP drivers alert CHP officers and the TMC of any incidents. 
Automatic Vehicle Locators 
FSP tow trucks are equipped with automatic vehicle locators (AVLs) to assist CHP 
officers and dispatchers with the whereabouts of a particular truck. The AVLs are 
programmed to identify tow trucks and plot truck locations on a computer screen. This 
process occurs at selected intervals and can be done quickly to locate a truck in the 
event of a radio failure or other emergency. 
Surveillance System and Graphics Display 
Another method for incident detection is the computerized electronic surveillance 
system, where available. This system can provide a graphic visual that can be quickly 
scanned to identify the location of a potential incident. A series of yellow lights 
indicates that a slowing condition exists, while red lights indicate that traffic congestion 
has developed. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-22 
      
     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
Table 110-2 Icon Depiction of Traffic Patterns 
Pattern Likely Situation 
Solid red to a point, then green 
downstream. An incident with lanes blocked. 
Solid red in both directions to a 
common point, then green 
downstream in each direction. 
Incident on one side of the highway with 
lanes blocked, visible from the other side of 
the highway. 
The number of red locations in one 
direction is greater than in the other. 
A longer queue indicates the direction of 
the incident. 
Red and yellow are interspersed 
and randomly change from one 
color to the other. 
Normal recurrent congestion, and likely no 
lanes are blocked. 
Yellow to a point, perhaps one red 
location, then green downstream. 
Unusual activity causing a distraction 
located on the shoulder. 
    
  
 
 
  
 
Table 110-3 Incident Influences on Traffic Flow 
Change in Traffic Data Observed Nature of Potential Incident 
Reduction in flow of 300 vehicles per 
lane per hour. 
Incident on the shoulder, not blocking 
a lane. 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Graphics may indicate an incident by showing a series of red and yellow icons, 
increasing in numbers upstream from the incident. The graphic screen shall be 
monitored for unusual groupings of red or yellow icons, or both. All suspected situations 
will be investigated by querying CHP VisiCAD, the electronic surveillance system data 
terminal, Caltrans communications dispatchers, FSP, Caltrans field units, or CCTV. Table 
110-2 lists some commonly occurring patterns for identifying a potential incident. 
Data Incident Detection 
Some electronic systems include automatic incident detection (AID) algorithms. This 
specialized software program continuously analyzes upstream and downstream traffic 
flow data and senses a sudden change in traffic flow from one reporting station to the 
next in a short time interval. This condition will trigger the AID alarm, which is usually 
depicted by a flashing red light on the status display map. As the alarm can be falsely 
triggered by recurrent traffic congestion conditions, it is only an indication of a potential 
traffic incident. 
A more reliable means to detect incidents is by examining traffic volumes and speed. 
Traffic volume data can indicate a reduction in capacity due to an incident. A cursory 
inspection of traffic volume and speed values can indicate a possible incident. Table 
110-3 shows some general patterns and their possible indications. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-23 
      
     
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
  
   
 
  
Change in Traffic Data Observed Nature of Potential Incident 
Reduction in speed below 20 mph. Likely one lane blocked on a multilane 
facility. 
Reduction in speed below 10 mph. Likely two or more lanes blocked. 
Other Sources 
Closed-Circuit Television 
CCTV relays real-time video images from cameras along highways to monitors in the 
TMC. CCTV cameras are primarily used for monitoring roadway operating conditions 
and incident verification. However, on occasion, CCTV serves as the initial means to 
verify incident details. The use of CCTV camera video can pinpoint the exact location 
of an incident and provide important details such as the number of vehicles involved, 
the number of lanes blocked, the length of the queue, and more. Once the 
appropriate emergency-response notifications have been given, CCTV monitors should 
be checked intermittently to observe the status of incident clearance activities and 
impacts on traffic. 
Caltrans Field Personnel 
Caltrans field personnel include maintenance, construction, and traffic management 
employees. Mobile phones and two-way radios are used to communicate between 
field units and the TMC in everyday operations, including reporting incidents. 
Media 
Commercial television and radio stations may also be used as a tool for incident 
detection. Radio stations provide the traveling public with reports on updated traffic 
conditions regularly. They can be used as a cross-reference as they are provided with 
information from airborne surveillance and reports from the public. Local broadcast 
and cable television stations also obtain information from airborne surveillance and 
other sources. CHP MediaCAD and Caltrans video links can also provide the TMC with 
video images and detailed reports from areas that are not under TMC electronic 
observation. Caltrans public information officers (PIOs) also provide information to the 
TMC and local media stations. 
Local Agencies 
Local agencies are a valuable source of information, especially during an incident that 
transpires within their area of jurisdiction and in the vicinity of the SHS. A list of local 
agency contacts should be made readily available for quick reference. 
Social Media 
Social networks and social media have become valuable sources of real-time 
information. TMC personnel may check social media sites such as X (formerly Twitter) 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-24 
      
     
   
 
 
  
   
  
 
     
  
     
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
and Facebook for incident detection. These sources may contain information and 
visuals to help identify the location and severity of an incident. 
Topic 4 Incident Verification 
Caltrans’ incident verification tools include communication with Caltrans field units from 
the Divisions of Traffic Operations, Maintenance, or Construction, CHP VisiCAD, and 
CCTV. CCTV is a critical tool for information gathering because it relays real-time visual 
information directly to the TMC. 
Initial incident information and verification can be obtained from CHP through cellular 
911 calls, roadside call boxes, and CHP field patrol units. Information from all CHP 
sources is entered into the CAD system, where TMC personnel can access it. Often, 
multiple reports, such as a series of cellular 911 calls, can help determine the incident 
severity and more accurately detect the location and direction of the incident. 
Upon receiving information about a possible incident, the CHP communications center 
creates a CAD log describing the incident. Based on severity and availability, CHP may 
respond to the scene of the reported incident and confirm its severity. Additional details 
are added to the CAD log as they are received by the CHP communications center. 
CHP or FSP officers on road patrol may be the first to observe and report an incident. 
The CHP communications center would then generate a CAD log indicating that the 
officer is at the incident scene. In this situation, TMC operations personnel will regard the 
incident as verified. 
Aerial surveillance can be used to verify the severity and details of a traffic incident. 
Helicopters or fixed-wing aircraft provide support for responding ground units. If 
necessary, specialized CHP aircraft may safely transport injured parties from the 
incident scene to local hospitals. Once the injured parties are removed from the scene, 
CHP and Caltrans personnel will then quickly work to reopen the highway. 
Another verification source is the FSP. Often, FSP is the first to arrive at the scene of an 
incident, particularly a minor incident, and can provide details on the exact location, 
the number of lanes blocked, and the need for additional response efforts from CHP to 
restore full traffic capacity quickly. Tow trucks in the field relay information by voice or 
data radio to the FSP dispatch center, which is then logged into the CAD system. 
Incident information can also be retrieved from commercial radio and TV stations. 
Topic 5 Incident Classification 
Traffic incidents significantly reduce the reliability and available capacity of the 
transportation system. Early detection is critical, as it enables personnel to respond 
quickly, clear the roadway, and restore normal traffic flow. The type and scale of 
response, however, must be carefully matched to the incident’s severity, safety 
considerations, and the expected duration of traffic impacts. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-25 
      
     
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
      
 
  
    
 
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Incident Duration 
According to the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (CA MUTCD), 
traffic incidents can be divided into three general classes of duration. These classes are: 
• Minor (expected duration under 30 minutes). 
• Intermediate (expected duration of 30 minutes to 2 hours). 
• Major (expected duration of more than 2 hours). 
To better understand incident duration, Figure 110-2 illustrates the incident timeline of 
the seven stages in the TIM process. Table 110-4 identifies and defines the key incident 
characteristics or “times” that can be obtained from the incident timeline. Caltrans, 
with support from CHP, has established incident clearance time (ICT) goals and actions 
to be taken to minimize the impact on traffic. 
Figure 110-3 Incident Timeline 
Table 110-4 Key Incident Characteristics From Incident Timeline 
Measure Calculation Definition 
Detection Time T1 – T0 The time between the incident occurring and the 
incident being reported. Detection time is not 
typically reported since the incident’s actual time is 
often unknown. 
Verification Time T2 – T1 The time between reporting the incident and 
verifying the incident. TMCs can typically assist with 
verification by using CCTV cameras. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-26 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
      
     
   
   
      
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
   
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Measure Calculation Definition 
Response Time T4 – T2 The time between verifying the incident and the first 
responder arriving on the scene. Law enforcement 
may not always be the first to arrive. 
Roadway 
Clearance Time 
(RCT) 
T5 – T1 The time between the first recordable awareness of 
the incident by a responsible agency and the first 
confirmation that all lanes are available for traffic 
flow. 
Incident 
Clearance Time 
(ICT) 
T6 – T1 Time between the first recordable awareness of the 
incident by a responsible agency and the time that 
the last responder left the scene. 
Incident Severity 
Incident severity focuses on fatalities, suspected serious injury, suspected minor injury, 
possible injury, property damage, and impacts on traffic flow. A TMC needs the 
following information to properly allocate resources to an incident: 
• What is the incident type and description? Examples include an overturned 
truck, spilled load, jackknifed truck, multi-vehicle incident, and others. 
• What is the roadway type, direction, location, and number of lanes involved? 
• Is a truck or heavy vehicle involved? 
• Are there reported injuries or fatalities? 
• Is there a spill, what is the material, how much has been spilled, and is it actively 
spilling? 
• Are hazardous materials (HAZMAT) or fire involved? 
It may be helpful to use a checklist to gather key information for proper incident 
management. Every district maintains a TMS for tracking the details and status of an 
incident. 
An important factor in providing the appropriate response effort is determining the 
anticipated impact on the flow of traffic based on normal traffic demand. The four 
periods of normal traffic flow demand are as follows: (1) a.m. peak, (2) p.m. peak, (3) 
midday, and (4) night. As traffic conditions vary from one facility to another and from 
one region of the state to another, each TMC must determine and set the actual hours 
when each flow condition applies. An example is: 
• Morning (a.m.) peak: 6:00 a.m. – 9:00 a.m. 
• Evening (p.m.) peak: 3:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m. 
• Midday: 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-27 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
      
     
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
• Night: 7:00 p.m. – 6:00 a.m. 
Sigalerts are issued for unplanned major incidents that affect one or more lanes and will 
block the roadway for at least 30 minutes, causing congestion and delay. Sigalerts are 
issued by either CHP officers in the field or from the CHP communications center. 
Examples of Sigalerts may include congestion-causing traffic incidents, spilled loads, 
leaking gas, or special events. A traffic advisory is a situation of a continuing nature 
spanning several days or that will occur each day for a predetermined period. 
Examples of traffic advisories may consist of high winds or blowing sand, flooding, 
construction or maintenance closures, and special events. 
Highway Condition Report Requirements 
HCRR is the requirement to report the incident depending on the severity, which is 
available through the HCRR Onramp web page. The HCRR identifies types and 
examples of incidents that TMCs and maintenance dispatch shall report to HCC within 
10 minutes of notification of the incident, as well as to their district executive 
management. In addition, the district's weekly duty officer shall call the Caltrans Deputy 
Director of Maintenance and Operations with all relevant information upon the 
occurrence of the following incidents: 
• Any incident that results in on-duty department personnel or contractor 
employee fatality. 
• Significant media incidents, as determined by district directors, depending on 
the level of media or political focus in that district. 
• Full closure of a major state route that causes significant delay. 
• When a Significant Incident Report is requested, please follow the instructions 
found on the Highway Condition Report Requirements Onramp web page. 
Traffic incidents identified in the HCRR will require a high level of response and should 
be prioritized. 
Major Incident Database 
The Major Incident Database (MIDB) is a web application that TMC personnel can 
access statewide to log major incidents. Major incident recording allows Caltrans to 
calculate TIM performance measures from the TIM timeline (Figure 110-2). These 
measures help Caltrans to promote safe and quick clearance and create strategies for 
improvements in incident response. TMC dispatchers will access and provide this 
information. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-28 
      
     
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
    
    
  
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Topic 6 Traffic Management Response 
This topic outlines the general notification call-out procedures and personnel for traffic 
management response. The procedures, field elements, and personnel may differ 
slightly by district. 
Response personnel may include the TMT, maintenance, CHP, special services, duty 
officers (districts or HQ), and personnel from allied agencies. In addition to coordinating 
with incident response personnel, the TMC actively provides traveler information during 
incident response and special events, as detailed in Section 3, Topic 9 “Traveler 
Information.” This includes utilizing available field elements like CMS, CHIN, HAR, and 
QuickMap to notify the traveling public of unusual driving conditions and possible 
alternate routes. Refer to Section 4, “Systems and Tools,” for more information on using 
traffic management tools. 
After the last responder has left the scene (refer to Figure 110-2), the TMC will compile 
the incident report for the TMT and TMC supervisor to review. The after-action report 
should reflect all communication about the incident involving the TMC and TMT. The 
TMC will also notify the district management and all other entities originally notified of 
the closure or incident that the incident is closed. 
Traffic Management Team Call-Out 
For districts that have a TMT, this section serves as a guideline for making the proper 
call-out and notification. The first step is determining if the incident requires TMT support. 
The following incident classifications or scenarios require TMT notification: 
• Major incidents. 
• Reportable incidents (as described in the HCRR). 
• Incidents that cause significant traffic delays of 30 minutes or more. 
• Maintenance or construction closures that cause significant traffic delays of 30 
minutes or more. 
• Long-term closures where a detour is made available to the public. 
Note: When in doubt, call the TMT. Consult the TMT if an incident falls outside of these 
definitions and allow the TMT to determine whether to mobilize. 
In general, the TMT lead is provided with a call-out map or a list of available TMT 
personnel. The list contains team members' contact information, function, vehicle type, 
and rank in order of call-out priority. The TMC operator will refer to the list to select and 
contact the primary TMT using a state-issued cell phone. If the primary TMT does not 
answer, leave a brief message with the date, time, and nature of the call on the TMT’s 
voicemail. Continue the call-out with the next TMT in the same manner, in the order 
stated on the call-out list. If unable to contact any of the above personnel, contact the 
TMC supervisor. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-29 
      
     
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Maintenance 
The TMC will notify district maintenance of incident details just before contacting the 
primary TMT. Incident callouts will normally be made by TMC dispatchers or CHP 
dispatch after normal working hours. Maintenance will update and maintain call-out 
maps and lists, and make them available for all personnel to access. 
California Highway Patrol 
TMC staff should not enter Caltrans TMT unit status into CHP’s CAD or VisiCAD unless 
specifically requested by CHP. Routine tracking and status of TMT units are maintained 
through Caltrans’ internal systems. 
Call-Outs for Non-24-Hour Transportation Management Centers 
In districts where the TMC is not operated continuously, an after-hours call-out 
procedure needs to be identified. Each district should develop and formalize a 
procedure that best suits its individual needs. The list of contact personnel should be 
distributed to all locations where it is needed, such as maintenance communications, 
the CHP communications center, or local law enforcement agencies. In general, during 
TMC non-operating hours, the CHP communications center will notify the identified 
Caltrans contact (such as the maintenance supervisor, lead, or member of TMC 
personnel), then the Caltrans contact will call out personnel requested by CHP. 
Special Services 
For some incidents, CHP may request that the TMC notify other special services for 
support in dealing with an incident. Such situations may require notifying a HAZMAT 
team or other state, regional, federal, or local government agencies. If the incident 
involves HAZMAT, the district hazardous materials coordinator must be contacted as 
soon as possible. These notifications should be carried out through the established 
procedures and designated contacts as defined in each district. 
If the situation requires emergency repair or specialized maintenance services, these 
contacts may also need to be initiated through the TMC. Such emergency services 
include electrical maintenance, structure maintenance, municipal or private utility 
services, or private sector entities under the listing of contacts. A list of contacts from all 
areas shall be maintained at the TMC. 
District Weekly Duty Officer 
After sufficient incident details are determined, a notice of the incident may need to 
be relayed to the district's weekly duty officer. The TMC should call the duty officer to 
give a full report for any of the following scenarios at any time; however, these 
scenarios may vary by district: 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-30 
      
     
   
   
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
   
   
 
  
 
    
  
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
• Incidents that cause more than four miles of traffic backup in addition to normal 
congestion and that are expected to last four or more hours. 
• Full closure of a major state route (in one or both directions) that causes 
significant delay. 
• Any incident involving a Caltrans vehicle or employee that results in a fatality to 
either the employee or another party. 
• Any incident involving a contractor performing Caltrans work resulting in a 
fatality to the contractor’s employee or another party. 
• Any incident that could be considered politically sensitive or would be likely to 
attract extensive media attention (such as cross-median incidents resulting in 
fatalities). 
The designated district weekly duty officer contact information shall be provided to the 
TMC. During normal weekday office hours, the TMC shall contact the designated duty 
officer on their state-issued cell phone and give detailed incident information. Outside 
normal working hours, the TMC shall contact the designated duty officer per the 
contact list. The list contains the call order, specific instructions, contact information, 
and the location of each contact. 
After each call is made, the incident report should be updated to note the person 
contacted with a brief description of the information given. The duty officer will 
reference the HCRR Onramp web page to determine when to notify the Deputy 
Director of Maintenance and Operations. 
Caltrans Headquarters Communication Center 
The HCC shall be notified through the TMC and maintenance dispatch of all directional 
closures, full closures, or incidents of unusual circumstances. Refer to the HCRR Onramp 
web page for more information on reportable incidents. 
Information provided shall include: 
• Limits of closure or occurrence. 
• Reason (including a description of HAZMAT, if involved). 
• Actual occurrence time of closure. 
• If a detour is available. 
• District and city, including the county, route, and post mile. 
• Additional desirable information, such as an expected time of opening and 
detour details, if available. 
Closure information shall be relayed to Caltrans HCC through CHP VisiCAD, telephone, 
fax, or Caltrans radio. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-31 
      
     
   
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
    
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Neighboring Transportation Management Center and State Traffic 
Operations 
Once a confirmed incident’s impact on traffic has been classified (such as low, 
moderate, or high), the TMC will need to estimate the impact on neighboring districts 
and agencies. If the situation affects only a localized area, then it is deemed of local 
significance only. If the situation affects a much wider area, potentially disrupts 
interregional travel, affects directional travel across district boundaries, or is anticipated 
to be an exceedingly long-duration incident, then the neighboring district TMC and the 
neighboring state department of transportation (DOT) should be notified following the 
process flow chart shown in Figure 110-3. 
Figure 110-4 Notification Process 
Incident Notification Process 
1. Confirm the incident. 
2. Assess incident traffic impact as: 
o High impact (incident duration is greater than 1 hour). 
o Moderate impact (incident duration is greater than 30 minutes, but less than 
1 hour). 
o Low impact (incident duration is less than 30 minutes). 
3. If the incident traffic impact is high or moderate, determine whether it affects 
only the local area or a larger regional area. 
4. If the incident is identified as significant in the HCRR, report it to HQ. 
If the incident affects only the local area, handle it appropriately within the confines of 
the TMC. If the incident affects neighboring areas, report the incident to HQ and the 
neighboring TMC or state DOT if any of the following conditions exist: 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-32 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
      
     
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
      
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
• If the incident causes unusually significant traffic congestion and is likely to 
become a newsworthy event. 
• If the incident affects interregional travel for a long duration. 
• If alternate routes need to be provided or coordinated with adjoining regions. 
Allied Agencies 
When a confirmed incident has the potential to substantially disrupt an allied 
transportation agency or transit provider’s facilities or operations, the TMC should relay 
a notification of the incident, along with details of the potential impacts to the agency 
as soon as is practical after incident confirmation. District PIOs are the primary contact 
to relay notification of incidents to outside agencies, including details of potential 
impact. Examples of organizations to be notified include: 
• Local transportation or traffic management agencies. 
• Area or regional transit providers. 
• Airport, harbor, or park authorities. 
• Commuter or regional rail operators. 
• Toll facility operating authorities. 
The TMC should define in advance which situations require notification and provide 
contact details for participating organizations. Creating informal written agreements 
can help ensure that all parties understand the notification criteria. 
Topic 7 Traffic Management Plans 
A TMP is a method for minimizing activity-related traffic delays and incidents by using 
traditional traffic handling practices and an innovative combination of strategies. TMP 
strategies are designed to improve safety and mobility for the traveling public and 
highway workers. These strategies include: 
• Public information 
• Motorist information 
• Incident management 
• Construction methods 
• Demand management 
• Alternate route planning 
TMPs can be classified by the anticipated impact of the highway work on the traveling 
public. A blanket TMP is used for low-impact maintenance and encroachment permit 
activities performed during off-peak hours on roadways with low volumes. A minor TMP 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-33 
      
     
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
is used for capital and maintenance projects where traffic impacts are not significant, 
and strategies need to go beyond those included in a blanket TMP. 
Major TMPs are prepared for capital, encroachment permit, and maintenance projects 
that could significantly impact traffic. Major TMPs are required for high-impact projects. 
Generally, major TMPs are identified by the following characteristics: 
• Multijurisdictional in scope, encompassing CHP, city, county, or regional 
governments, state DOTs, employers, merchants, developers, transit operators, 
ridesharing agencies, neighborhood and special interest groups, emergency 
services, and transportation management associations. 
• Multifaceted, comprised of an innovative mix of traffic operations, facility 
enhancement, demand management, and public relations strategies, as well as 
more traditional work zone actions, construction methods, and contract 
incentives that are customized to meet the unique needs of the impacted 
corridor. 
• In place over a longer period, sometimes implemented up to a year or more 
before the start of actual construction, with specific elements often 
implemented incrementally to coincide with construction phasing. 
TMPs are required for all construction, maintenance, encroachment permit projects, 
planned emergency restorations, locally or specially funded projects, or other activities 
on the SHS. Traffic management activities coordinated by the TMC may encompass 
items such as planned lane closures, special events, and emergency road closures. 
Definitions 
Significant traffic impact is an individual traffic delay of 30 minutes or more above 
normal recurrent travel time on the existing facility, but may also refer to work that may 
affect traffic conditions over a long period. 
Major lane closures are lane closures that are expected to result in significant traffic 
impacts despite the implementation of TMPs. 
Traffic handling contingency plan is an operational method that consists of strategies or 
actions taken to restore or minimize effects on traffic when the congestion or delay 
exceeds the original TMP estimates. This situation may result from unforeseen events 
such as work zone incidents, higher-than-predicted traffic demand, or late lane closure 
openings. 
Responsibilities 
The following outlines the individual responsibilities of TMP personnel, including the 
district traffic manager, the district TMP manager, and the district construction engineer 
or resident engineer. 
District Traffic Manager 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-34 
      
     
   
  
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
     
   
   
  
  
 
    
 
   
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
• Responsible for the day-to-day decisions of traffic impacts from planned 
activities on the SHS. Determines the extent of a TMP. 
• Coordinates with TMC staff (as well as adjacent districts) and PIOs to respond 
with appropriate measures when planned lane closure activities result in 
significant travel delays on the SHS. 
• Facilitates review, approval, modification, or denial of planned lane closure 
requests. 
• Recommends terminating or modifying active lane closure operations without 
compromising the safety of the public or workers when traffic impact becomes 
significant. 
District Traffic Management Plan Manager 
• Acts as the single focal point for planning and developing TMPs. 
• Works with the district traffic manager, TMC manager, and the project 
development team as appropriate to determine the scope and extent of a TMP 
and ensure that the TMP is updated during all phases of a project. 
District Construction Engineer or Resident Engineer 
• Serves as a liaison between construction, the district traffic manager, the district 
TMP manager, and the TMP manager. 
• Coordinates with the district traffic manager and the district TMP manager to 
consider traffic and construction impacts if an event is scheduled in an active 
work zone or construction area. 
Planned Lane Closures 
Planned lane closures are non-emergency lane closures that are scheduled in 
advance by the following areas: construction, maintenance, and encroachment 
permits. TMPs are required for all projects with work that requires planned closures, and 
are to be reviewed in advance by the district traffic manager. All planned lane closures 
are submitted through the Lane Closure System (LCS) and are approved by the LCS 
coordinator or district traffic manager. Changes to the approved lane closure can only 
be made by the LCS coordinator or district traffic manager. 
The TMC should be notified of planned lane closures to monitor traffic conditions 
around the closure area while the project is actively in progress. The TMC is responsible 
for updating the status of a lane closure in the LCS once reported. If traffic congestion 
occurs, the TMC may be requested to activate CMS, coordinate with TMT field units, 
and work with CHP to issue traffic advisories as needed. 
The following traffic break activities are exempted from the LCS requirements: 
• Emergency brief breaks (defined as one minute or less) conducted by a CHP 
officer or other law enforcement officer to remove items from the traveled way. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-35 
      
     
   
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
• A closure is already in place, and the engineer authorized an on-duty officer to 
conduct a traffic break. 
Special Events 
Any special event (such as a sporting event, county fair, parade, concert, or air show) 
that is expected to cause a significant traffic impact should be handled in the same 
way as a planned lane closure. A traffic management response effort will be 
predetermined and put into action in conjunction with the scheduled event. The TMC 
should be notified of special events to monitor traffic conditions around the event area. 
The TMC may be requested to activate CMS, coordinate with TMT field units, and work 
with CHP to issue traffic advisories as needed. 
Emergency Lane or Road Closures 
An emergency closure is an unplanned, unscheduled lane or roadway closure for 
public safety. As with planned lane closures, the TMC must monitor traffic conditions 
near the emergency area. Upon receiving the initial notification of closure, the TMC 
should request as much detail as possible, especially the number of lanes affected and 
the duration. This information, together with knowledge of the time of day (TOD), traffic 
volume, and more, will help to determine if a traffic advisory will need to be issued and 
if the TMT will be needed. Since an emergency closure is unplanned, the TMC will follow 
notification and coordination procedures outlined in the Emergency Traffic 
Management Guide. 
If an emergency results in a full closure requiring an alternate route, this usually involves 
coordinating with the appropriate public agencies (including CHP and Caltrans field 
personnel) as well as any involved private sector entities to develop an emergency 
TMP. This may include the use of roadway closures, special signing, detours, public 
information advisories, and other methods that would assist the motorist around the 
closed facility, as well as expedite highway worker and emergency responder efforts to 
reopen the facility. Occasionally, interaction with local agency traffic engineers is 
required to modify traffic signals along a specific highway detour route. 
Topic 8 Recurrent Congestion Management 
Ramp Metering 
Ramp metering is a traffic management strategy that uses a system of traffic signals at 
highway entrances and connector ramps to regulate traffic volume and the spacing of 
vehicles entering a highway corridor. This strategy is beneficial because it increases 
highway throughput and operating speeds, maintains safer merging operations, and 
reduces collisions. For additional ramp meter design and operation materials, refer to 
the Ramp Metering Design Manual and Traffic Operations Manual, Chapter 215, Part 4, 
“Ramp Metering Operations." 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-36 
      
     
   
 
   
   
 
 
     
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
    
    
   
   
 
    
   
 
    
   
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Components 
A ramp metering system contains two categories of components: ramp meter 
components and ramp meter data collection components. A full list of components 
can be found in Traffic Operations Manual Chapter 215, Part 4, Section 2, “Basic Ramp 
Meter Layout.” The following components may be relevant for TMC communications 
and operations: 
• Controller – A controller is used to control the sequence and duration of ramp 
meter indications. All meters should use a Model 2070 controller. 
• Communications – The ramp metering systems must be in constant 
communication so that every 30 seconds they can transmit traffic data and 
operational statuses to the TMC or other operating districts’ central system. 
• Ramp meters and associated equipment. 
Modes of Operation 
Ramp meters can operate in different modes to set or adjust the rate at which vehicles 
enter a highway facility. Flow rates can be fixed by the time of day (TOD) or 
automatically adjusted to be responsive to fluctuating traffic demand. The different 
modes of operation can be found in the Traffic Operations Manual Chapter 215, Part 4, 
Section 3, “Operational Requirements,” and are as follows: 
• Fixed-Rate – Ramp meter shall actively meter and have fixed green, yellow, and 
red interval lengths. 
• Traffic responsive – Ramp meter shall actively meter at a determined metering 
plan rate based upon the measured mainline flow, occupancy, and speed, and 
compare those values to the corresponding thresholds in the selected metering 
plan. The mainline flow, occupancy, and speed may be measured adjacent to 
the onramp or over the length of a highway segment. Queue override may be 
selected as the highest priority. 
• Rest-In-Dark – Metered lane shall advance to the pre-metering non-green 
interval. 
• Rest-In-Green – Metering interval shall advance to the pre-metering green 
interval. 
Operational Considerations 
For some of the ramp metering modes, the system estimates the current capacity 
(vehicles per hour) of each critical bottleneck on the highway. Since capacity varies 
with road conditions, weather, and driving behavior, it is not easily defined. It is also 
necessary for the ramp meter system to predict demand on the system for the next 
sample interval (usually 30 seconds, but may vary by district). If the demand exceeds 
capacity, the ramp meter system allocates the available main lane capacity between 
the various locations. If demand is below capacity, the ramp meter system allocates 
the excess capacity between any ramps or connectors that have queues. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-37 
      
     
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Ramp meters can also be programmed to compensate for vehicles that use the non-
metered high-occupancy vehicle bypass and adjust the metering rate accordingly. 
Integrated Corridor Management 
As an alternative to building new highways and streets, Caltrans works with local 
agencies to utilize advanced traffic management strategies and optimize the flow of 
traffic within a transportation corridor. These management strategies are designed to 
improve the flow of traffic and decrease congestion through a corridor, consisting of a 
highway segment and associated major parallel arterial streets. Integrated corridor 
management (ICM) requires cooperation between agencies, including Caltrans and 
CHP, regional transportation agencies, and local jurisdictions. 
The fundamental objective of ICM is to maximize the efficiency and throughput of the 
existing highway and surface street network. The following presents key ICM elements 
and techniques: 
Congestion Monitoring 
The ICM central processing system continuously monitors traffic conditions in the 
corridor. The system will adjust corridor surface street traffic signals and highway ramp 
meters to balance system flows. CCTV cameras and field observations are used to 
monitor the effects of timing changes. 
Incident Detection 
The ICM central system will detect if there is a significant change in traffic speed 
between detection stations, identifying a potential traffic incident. When the ICM 
central system suspects an incident, it notifies Caltrans or local agency control center 
operators, or both. TMC personnel will attempt to confirm suspected incidents using 
CCTV cameras and through field personnel. 
Motorist Information 
The TMS is a component of the ICM central system that provides current traffic 
condition information and suggested alternate route advice to motorists through: 
• CMSs on highways and streets. 
• HAR broadcasts. 
• QuickMap and other mobile apps like Google Maps. 
• Media traffic reports. 
Operational Considerations 
The ICM functionality is obtained through a mix of computer automation and operator 
involvement. Routine ICM operation is to be performed by the personnel designated as 
ICM coordinators. Currently, procedures outlining the use of these systems are guided 
by general concepts for ICM operation as mutually agreed upon by participating 
agencies. If stationed within the TMC, the ICM coordinator should handle all requests for 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-38 
      
     
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
     
 
  
   
   
   
  
   
 
     
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
      
 
    
   
 
   
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
assistance as well as requests to combine traffic management response efforts with 
participating agencies. 
Topic 9 Traveler Information 
Traveler information is an important part of the TMS. This includes communication 
devices used to report real-time traffic conditions, such as CMSs, CHIN, HARs, and 
QuickMap. These devices are also used to alert drivers to construction and 
maintenance activities that may affect normal travel patterns. 
One of the primary functions of the TMC is to provide the most up-to-date traffic 
information to help travelers make informed travel plans. Traveler information should be 
traffic-related and consist of the following information: 
• Number and type of lanes blocked. 
• Number and type of vehicles involved in an incident. 
• Expected duration of the blockage. 
• Queue length. 
TMCs are typically joint operations between CHP and Caltrans. Together, they monitor 
traffic conditions and coordinate responses to incidents on the SHS. The TMCs share 
traffic information with the public through Caltrans Public Affairs and commercial 
media platforms. This data is open-source and available to third-party users at their 
discretion. 
Caltrans and CHP PIOs often collaborate with regional agencies and media ISPs to 
distribute multimodal travel information through Advanced Travel Information Systems 
(ATIS). ATIS refers to the delivery of real-time information on traffic, transit, and other 
travel modes, either directly to travelers or through intermediaries. As per DD-19-R3, 
“Caltrans Public Information Officers (PIO) are responsible for handling media inquiries in 
accordance with the California Public Records Act (refer to Deputy Directive 79), and 
Caltrans’ policies.” 
Commercial and media ISPs are companies that repackage, enhance, and redistribute 
this open-source data in various formats and media. Because the data is publicly 
available, ISPs can freely access resources such as the Commercial Wholesale Web 
Portal 2 (CWWP2), CHP MediaCAD, QuickMap, HAR, CMS, etc. Distributing this 
information to ISPs and other stakeholders enhances public awareness of current road 
conditions, benefiting consumers by helping them make informed travel decisions. This 
broad access supports more efficient use of the transportation system for business, 
family, and personal travel needs. 
Note: Never report fatalities or the status of injured individuals in the traffic information 
provided to the public or the media. This would violate individual privacy. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-39 
      
     
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Commercial Wholesale Web Portal 2 
In accordance with DD-078 on Travel Information, the CWWP2 is a centralized platform 
that provides open-source traffic and transportation data from Caltrans to external 
users, including media outlets, developers, researchers, and private sector companies 
such as navigation and mapping services. Key Features of CWWP2 include the 
following: 
• Data Access: Users can download real-time and archived transportation data, 
such as traffic speeds, lane closures, incidents, road conditions, construction 
updates, and CMS messages. 
• Public and Commercial Use: The data is open source, meaning it's freely 
available for third-party use without requiring an MOU. 
• Developer-Friendly: CWWP2 offers access via URLs and APIs, allowing developers 
and commercial ISPs to integrate Caltrans data into their apps, services, or 
research tools. 
• Supports Traveler Information Systems: The data from CWWP2 helps power travel 
information platforms like QuickMap and is often repackaged by media and 
navigation services (such as Google Maps, Waze, and others). 
CWWP2 promotes transparency, collaboration, and improved mobility by enabling the 
wide distribution of accurate, real-time travel data. It supports Caltrans' goals of 
reducing congestion, improving safety, and helping travelers make informed decisions. 
Commercial Television Broadcasts from TMC Facilities 
CHP and Caltrans share joint responsibility for overseeing live broadcasts originating 
from TMC facilities. ISPs seeking to conduct live broadcasts within a TMC must do so in 
accordance with an approved Live Commercial Broadcasting MOU. Once the MOU is 
in place, the ISP may carry out live broadcasts from designated locations and in a 
manner authorized by Caltrans or CHP, or both. For more information, refer to Appendix 
110 A, Topic 2 “Live Commercial Broadcasting Memorandum of Understanding.” 
To protect privacy and ensure operational security, Caltrans or CHP, or both, reserve 
the right to review, screen, or edit any broadcast content. Additionally, during state or 
federally declared emergencies or major incidents, the ISP must provide access to its 
broadcast feed upon request by Caltrans or CHP. 
Commercial television broadcasting is already established at several TMC locations. For 
instance, the District 4 TMC supports commercial broadcasts through the Bay Area’s 511 
Partnership. In accordance with DD-19-R3 on Media Relations/Public Information and 
the Traffic Operations Manual, TMC managers are required to provide equal and 
consistent access to all ISPs requesting broadcasting rights, ensuring fairness and 
uniform compliance across all TMC facilities. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-40 
      
     
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Changeable Message Signs and Highway Advisory Radio 
CMSs and HARs provide real-time traffic information to motorists directly. These 
elements relay information concerning incidents, planned lane closures, road 
conditions, special events, or other unusual traffic conditions to motorists. Messages 
must be updated promptly to remain accurate in changing conditions. Updating CMSs 
and HARs is the highest priority activity in the TMC. 
Caltrans Highway Information Network 
Messages similar in content and format to those broadcasted over HAR may also be 
conveyed through CHIN. CHIN is a computer-based recording system that makes 
current highway condition information available to the entire state by telephone at 
(800) 427-7623. Each TMC will supply information to HCC for placement into CHIN. CHIN 
messages are also made available to view on QuickMap and are the responsibility of 
the HCC. 
QuickMap 
The Caltrans QuickMap web page and mobile app present several types of real-time 
traffic information layered on a Google Map. The information includes traffic speed, 
lane and full closures, CHP incidents, highway information, CMS content, camera 
snapshots, active chain control requirements, and the locations of snowplow 
operations. Much of the information presented by Caltrans QuickMap is also available 
on the Road Information website, which includes lane closures, CHIN messages, and 
chain controls. QuickMap also presents information from the Media CHP Traffic Incident 
Information web page. 
In addition to the information presented by Caltrans QuickMap, links to regional 511 
sites are accessible in the Caltrans QuickMap drop-down menu labeled “Regional 
Sites.” These sites are provided by other organizations, in partnership with Caltrans, to 
supply comprehensive commuter and multimodal traveler information within their 
regions. 
Media 
Media organizations use direct information from Caltrans (such as CMSs, HARs, and 
QuickMap) to report traffic news to the motoring public. The information provided may 
consist of incidents, road conditions, planned lane closures, special events, and areas 
of recurrent congestion. Each district has a public information office that the TMC 
contacts to assist with producing public notices. Each public information office also 
posts real-time traffic alerts on social media to inform the public. 
In some districts, CHP provides traffic incident information to the media through 
regularly scheduled commercial radio or television broadcasts sent from the TMC and 
CHP MediaCAD. Incidents that trigger the issuance of a Sigalert are broadcasted 
through the CHP communications dispatch center and are monitored by traffic-
reporting media organizations. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-41 
      
     
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
    
 
    
  
 
  
 
   
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Emergency road closures not caused by a traffic incident, such as closures due to 
flood, fire, earthquake, mudslide, or snow, are usually handled in the same manner as 
incidents for purposes of media access. In the case of adverse travel conditions when 
the facility remains open to traffic, such as high winds, reduced visibility due to fog or 
snow, or icy road surfaces, the notice is generally provided as a traffic advisory. A traffic 
advisory is handled the same way as a Sigalert if the traffic conditions meet the criteria 
of a Sigalert. 
Third Party 
Third-party systems are widely used and can provide transportation users with timely 
travel information to improve mobility, reduce travel costs, and increase personal travel 
convenience. Mobile apps like Google Maps feature GPS turn-by-turn navigation along 
with real-time traffic and weather alerts. Both web applications rely on user data and 
receive information on traffic conditions from QuickMap. Google's database of 
historical traffic data allows the app to alert drivers when traffic is better or worse than 
usual, and how much additional time is added due to incidents and slowdowns. 
Topic 10 California Highway Patrol Missing Person 
Alerts 
CHP’s Emergency Notification and Tactical Alert Center (ENTAC) is responsible for 
issuing America’s Missing Broadcast Emergency Response (AMBER) Alerts to get 
community assistance in the search for and safe recovery of an endangered, missing, 
or abducted person. Not all AMBER Alerts will have CMS support. If an AMBER Alert 
meets certain criteria to require CMS support, then the TMC will be requested for CMS 
support. CHP will contact the TMCs in the region, and Caltrans will activate CMSs and 
HARs in the impacted area and the possible path of travel. 
Missing Person Alert (AMBER Alert) Messages 
CHP and Caltrans have agreed on the standard content and format for CMS messages 
during Missing Person Alerts. CHP will provide Caltrans with the CMS wording in the 
agreed-upon format, in compliance with the CA MUTCD and Changeable Message 
Sign (CMS) Guidelines. AMBER Alert messages are typically a one-phase, three-line 
message that gives motorists information about a missing person. The message should 
display a vehicle description and license plate number (or partial number). An example 
of an AMBER Alert message for a child abduction is shown in Figure110-4. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-42 
      
     
   
 
   
 
  
      
    
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
    
  
     
     
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
     
 
Figure 110-5 AMBER Alert Message Example 
The second line of an AMBER Alert message is the most important component. The CMS 
operator may need to omit some information and display only what is most helpful for 
the public. Experience has shown that motorists are less familiar with the vehicle year 
than with the vehicle color. For example, it is more effective to show “WHITE FORD 
ESCAPE” as opposed to “2025 FORD ESCAPE.” 
AMBER Alert Activation and Deactivation 
To activate an AMBER Alert, ENTAC first needs to call the TMC and request CMS support 
for an AMBER Alert. TMC personnel should then activate CMS or HAR or both, create an 
incident management log, and contact HCC when the activation is complete. When 
an AMBER Alert has been deactivated, CHP will immediately contact Caltrans and 
request the message removal. Upon deactivation, TMC personnel are to deactivate 
CMS and HAR field elements and notify HCC when the deactivation is complete. 
Caltrans may remove the AMBER Alert message on specific signs when local traffic 
conditions warrant posting traffic control messages. 
Caltrans will only respond to AMBER alert requests from the CHP ENTAC. If Caltrans is 
contacted by a law enforcement agency other than CHP for AMBER activation, the 
call should be immediately forwarded to CHP. 
Post-Alert Reporting 
Every participating TMC must, within 24 hours, file an online Post-Alert Participation 
Report to HQ Traffic Operations. 
This information is needed for logging Caltrans’ activity level. It is important to file the 
report on time and as completely as possible. Reporting this data helps present a 
complete picture of Caltrans’ efforts and support improvement recommendations. 
The following is a list of data needed for the Post-Alert Report: 
• District. 
• City or area where activation was requested. 
• City or area where the individual was found. 
• Conclusion (person found, canceled, or other). 
• Request received by Caltrans (date and time). 
• Activation of CMS and HAR (date and time). 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-43 
      
     
   
  
    
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
• Activation speed (number of minutes it took to activate all field elements). 
• Deactivation of CMS and HAR (date and time). 
• Deactivation speed (number of minutes it took to activate all field elements). 
• Personnel hours (estimated total involvement). 
• Message displayed. 
• Message displayed #2 (if modified). 
• Number of permanent CMS used. 
• Number of portable changeable message signs (PCMS) used. 
• Number of CMS used for traffic alerts. 
• Number of CMS not used. 
• Reasons for not using the unused CMS. 
• Number of HAR used. 
• Traffic impacts (such as delays or incidents). 
• Operational impacts (such as overtime). 
• HAR message. 
• Effectiveness of CMS and HAR use (high – low). 
• Other notes. 
Topic 11 Traffic Data Analysis 
Traffic data analysis is used to assist with planning and management efforts. Data 
analysis can reveal locations of constrained traffic flow (bottlenecks), shifting patterns 
of travel demand, or temporary seasonal variations in traffic flow. Ongoing short-term 
data analysis can provide the means to optimize traffic flow and balance minor 
fluctuations in the overall system operation. 
More extensive analysis of stored traffic data patterns can lead to the development of 
major construction or reconstruction projects. Traffic data may indicate the need for 
auxiliary lanes, interchange modifications, widening, or roadway realignment projects. 
Data analysis may also reveal the locations where such roadway improvements would 
be most cost-effective. Once implemented, project effectiveness evaluations can be 
performed again by analyzing traffic data in the post-construction phase. 
Traffic Information Sources 
Active Intelligent Transportation System 
The Active Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) is a computerized system used to 
gather highway volume and occupancy data from inductive loop detectors located 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-44 
      
     
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
    
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
at frequent intervals on the highways and to provide an interface for controlling field 
element operation (e.g., CMS, CCTV). The central traffic system then analyzes the data 
to provide hard copy reports or electronic displays (either wall maps or computer color 
graphics) of the highway conditions. The information is displayed on graphic 
workstations located both within and outside the TMC. 
Closed-Circuit Television 
Closed-circuit television (CCTV) provides real-time video images from cameras along 
highways to monitors in the TMC. The video images from the cameras are transmitted to 
the TMC using communication media. The cameras are used to assist with the 
verification of traffic incidents and roadway operating conditions and are an 
exceptional tool for providing details, such as the number of vehicles involved, the 
number of lanes blocked, and the length of the queue. On occasion, cameras can 
serve as the initial source to detect an incident. 
Caltrans Performance Measurement System 
The Caltrans Performance Measurement System (PeMS) provides real-time and 
historical traffic data. Different types of performance data are available, such as 
volumes, speeds, delays, vehicle miles traveled, vehicle hours traveled, travel times, 
and annual average daily traffic. PeMS collects data from the following sources: 
• ITS vehicle detector stations (VDS). 
• Traffic census stations. 
• Weigh-in-motion sensors. 
• CHP incident data. 
• Caltrans LCS. 
• Real-time CMS. 
Transportation Safety and Mobility Information System 
The Transportation Safety and Mobility Information System (TSMIS) is a database tool for 
storing and reporting traffic volumes. The TSMIS can generate reports to summarize 
hourly, daily, and monthly traffic volumes. The TSMIS is only available internally to 
Caltrans and requires an account login. Some TSMIS traffic volume data is available 
publicly through the Caltrans Traffic Census Program web page. Traffic volumes stored 
on the TSMIS are validated and are generally more accurate than historical volumes 
available on PeMS. In addition to traffic volumes, the TSMIS includes other data 
elements such as traffic collisions and truck percentages. 
Research 
Traffic data analysis may include research efforts in conjunction with other agencies or 
private parties. The following includes categories of research efforts. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-45 
      
     
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Agency-Sponsored Analysis 
Analysis conducted by agency personnel for research purposes may include 
applications such as land use planning, origin and destination studies, or assessment of 
the future need for local infrastructure expansion. 
Academic Research 
Academic research using historical traffic data may be aimed at improving traffic flow 
theory, developing or optimizing traffic control strategies, enhancing traffic 
management decision support systems, or verifying the predictions of previous travel 
forecasting models. 
Private Third-Party Research 
Private sector research efforts may involve analyzing potential traffic impacts of 
proposed new land developments, determining historic recurrent congestion patterns 
for new product development, or developing or refining private motorist information 
systems. 
System Assessment 
Traffic data can be analyzed to assess how effectively traffic management and control 
strategies have been performed over time, to gauge the congestion level on the 
highway system and any trends that occur, to calibrate input parameters for variables 
used in traffic control software, and to determine the need for central processing 
system upgrades or enhancements to application software. 
Performance 
Analysis of recurrent traffic congestion patterns and observation of any changes in 
trends can be used to determine the effectiveness of congestion management 
strategies. Historical data analysis can identify the need to implement congestion 
management practices and determine where their use would be most effective. In 
some types of improvement projects, the sponsoring agency requires a comparison of 
before and after traffic conditions to measure the project’s effectiveness. 
Calibration 
A sufficiently large sample size of data can be used to refine traffic management and 
control application programs. Historical data analysis can yield the proper threshold 
values to insert into AID algorithms to improve their detection rate and reduce the 
number of false alarms. Data can also be used to fine-tune metering rates and optimize 
other traffic signalization, which affects traffic flow on the SHS. Data may also produce 
useful input to traffic management decision support systems, improving their 
performance. 
Upgrade and Enhancement 
A secondary result of analyzing historical traffic data over a long period is identifying 
the need for improved manipulation of traffic data within the central computational 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-46 
      
     
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
     
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
    
 
 
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
processing system. Experience may show the need for different data formats, different 
means of summarizing the data into more convenient forms, or the need to develop 
new processing algorithms to analyze the data differently. 
Topic 12 Snow Operations 
Caltrans snow operations primarily include chain controls, snow plowing, seasonal 
closures, and monitoring roadways and weather conditions. When chain control is 
warranted, district maintenance staff notifies the TMC of the locations and level of 
chain requirements. The TMC will then create an incident management log, activate 
both CMSs and HARs, and notify HCC. HQ will update CHIN to show chain control 
areas. 
Levels of Chain Requirements: 
• Requirement 1 (R1): Chains are required on all vehicles except passenger 
vehicles and light-duty trucks under 6,000 pounds gross weight and equipped 
with snow tires on at least two drive wheels. Chains must be carried by vehicles 
using snow tires. All vehicles towing trailers must have chains on one drive axle. 
Trailers with brakes must have chains on at least one axle. 
• Requirement 2 (R2): Chains or traction devices are required on all vehicles 
except four-wheel or all-wheel drive vehicles with snow-tread tires on all four 
wheels. Note that four-wheel or all-wheel-drive vehicles must carry traction 
devices in chain control areas. 
• Requirement 3 (R3): Chains or traction devices are required on all vehicles, with 
no exceptions. 
R-1 and R-2 are the most common conditions. A highway will often be closed before an 
R-3 condition is imposed. Some districts may use variations of these designations. 
Transportation Management Center Snow Operations Procedures: 
• Track the 10-13 (as shown on form CHP 254, “Aural Brevity Codes”) for chain 
controls, weather conditions, and snow level totals. 
• Monitor Caltrans maintenance radios and document when chain controls are 
established or changed. 
• The TMC must notify HQ when chain controls are established or changed. 
Information provided shall include the limits of chain requirements and the 
restrictions for each affected route. 
• Activate or update CMS and HAR with chain control conditions. 
• Relay information between CHP and maintenance on snow plowing status and 
updates. 
• After an incident, communicate with CHP when a mountain pass escort is 
required and estimate delays. Notify HQ. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-47 
      
     
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
Section 3 Transportation Management Center Operations February 2026 
Topic 13 Earthquake Monitoring 
The TMC monitors earthquakes using the California Integrated Seismic Network (CISN) 
real-time California ShakeMaps. The CISN provides reliable monitoring and continuous 
reporting of all significant earthquake activity in California. For earthquakes of a 
magnitude of 3.5 and higher, the CISN produces maps depicting the intensity of ground 
shaking. The ShakeMap is distributed electronically within minutes of the earthquake 
and is updated as additional data becomes available. 
The TMC will notify HQ of an earthquake of any magnitude that causes damage to the 
SHS or any earthquake of 4.0 in magnitude or higher, regardless of damage. Reference 
the HCRR web page for more information. 
Transportation Management Center Earthquake Procedures: 
1. Check the CISN to determine if the earthquake status is verified. Use the 
ShakeMap to locate impacted areas. 
2. Create an incident report, including the CHP VisiCAD number and start time. 
3. Notify supervisors in various areas, such as maintenance, landscape, bridge, and 
electrical. 
4. Contact CHP dispatch if they are not co-located with Caltrans. 
5. Advise the TMT unit if there are reports of any full or partial roadway closures or 
structural damage to any bridges. 
6. Activate field elements if needed to advise of any road closures. 
7. Update incident status, including the incident report, HQ, and field elements. 
8. Notify HCC. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-48 
    
     
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
Section 4 S  ystems  and Tool s  
Topic 1 Overview 
ATMS is comprised of software and field elements, such as ramp meters, traffic 
detection sensors, and CCTVs, used to observe and manage the transportation system. 
TMCs operate TMS elements to effectively manage highway traffic and communicate 
traveler information. Additional software and systems are also used to manage TMC 
operations. This chapter discusses those systems and TMS elements used in TMCs. 
TMCs currently use different control systems in various combinations across the state. 
Over the years, control systems have changed as new applications were added to 
meet the needs of each district, and will continue to change with new technology, 
methods, and innovation. Thus, each district’s TMC control system grew independently, 
resulting in multiple costly annual statewide maintenance contracts. This independent 
growth challenges the notion of statewide standardization, efficiency, and 
interoperability among the districts. 
Caltrans plans to replace the 12 different existing TMC control systems with the 
California Advanced Transportation Management System (CATMS). CATMS is a new 
statewide TMS platform that will standardize and integrate the 12 TMCs, providing 
enhanced services, greater work efficiency, and laying the foundation for future 
growth. 
Topic 2 Reporting and Application Systems 
A key function of TMC systems and applications is to record the TMC activities involved 
in traffic and incident management. TIM activity reporting has been an important part 
of Caltrans TMC operations since TMCs opened. Historically, TMC TIM activities were 
recorded in paper logs during the 1990s and through the early 2000s. TIM activity 
reporting later evolved to Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, and then to district-developed 
applications. 
TMCs report TIM activities for the following reasons: 
• Increases the safety of the SHS for all users and responders. 
• Provides supporting information for legal staff and claims. 
• Supports incident management among operators and dispatchers. 
• Creates an audit trail for the activities performed. 
• Improves incident response. 
• Captures RCTs. 
• Captures ICTs. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-49 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
    
    
 
     
    
 
    
    
    
    
     
    
    
    
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
• Captures secondary incident identification. 
• Captures workload performance. 
The following is a brief overview of the major incident management applications and 
systems that are currently in use. 
While districts are diligent about reporting TMC activities, their methods vary. The 
following list shows how each district reports information: 
• District 1 – IRIS logs, paper logs, TMCAL (for some incidents and chain control). 
• District 2 – TMCAL (chain control), info relays for CMS, RWIS, and CCTV to the 
Commercial Wholesale Web Portal. 
• District 3 – TMCAL, both dispatch and operations. 
• District 4 – Bay Area Incident Response System (BAIRS), the website for ENTAC 
Alerts. 
• District 5 – TMCAL (operations and dispatching). 
• District 6 – TMCAD and TMCAL (chain control). 
• District 7 – TMCAL (operations and dispatching) and ATMS (operations). 
• District 8 – ReDIAL and TMCAL (chain control). 
• District 9 – Paper logs and TMCAL (chain control). 
• District 10 – TMCAD and TMCAL (chain control). 
• District 11 – ATMS (operations) and TMCAL (dispatching). 
• District 12 – Active ITS. 
• HCC – Database web portal. 
Transportation Management Center Activity Logging 
TMCAL is a MySQL database system that captures CHP VisiCAD data, providing TMC 
operators and dispatchers with a tool to monitor all activities performed within the TMC. 
TMCAL interfaces with systems such as CHIN, CHP MediaCAD, and QuickMap. 
Transportation Management Center Activity Database 
The Transportation Management Center Activity Database (TMCAD) integrates District 6 
procedures so the operator or dispatcher can check off the required tasks before 
closing the incident. TMCAD has a series of displays for field elements to enter the 
activities for using CMS, PCMS, and HAR with messages posted. TMCAD is a standalone 
application that does not link to other systems. All entries are made by the operator or 
dispatcher. 
Bay Area Incident Response System 
BAIRS is an integrated incident tracking system that provides tools to improve Caltrans’ 
incident response capability. BAIRS operates in a regional environment with interfaces 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-50 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
to several key elements. BAIRS is a web-based incident log with the following 
capabilities: Geographical Information System (GIS), enhanced reporting, performance 
metrics, mobile devices, increased incident information availability for both dispatcher 
and supervisor, online contact availability, and qualification information availability. 
Daily Incident Activity Logger 
The Daily Incident Activity Logger (DIAL) has an efficient interface for operators. DIAL 
provides easy access to contacts and phone books and links the CAD ID to all activities 
with a single user selection, improving operator performance. 
Renewed Daily Incident Activity Logger 
The Renewed Daily Incident Activity Logger (ReDIAL) is a lightweight, custom-built 
incident management platform designed by and for Caltrans TMC operations. Unlike 
off-the-shelf tools, ReDIAL was built from the ground up to match real-world workflows, 
helping operators stay focused on traffic management rather than data entry. 
ReDIAL passively captures and standardizes operator activity, enabling accurate, real-
time logging of incidents. This improves consistency across staff, supports accountability, 
and preserves critical data for performance tracking and reporting. 
Advanced Transportation Management System 
The ATMS and Advanced Transportation Management System Replacement (ATMSR) 
are legacy and replacement systems used to manage the SHS using vehicle detectors 
and video from roadside cameras. The ATMS and ATMSR also send operator messages 
and travel times to variable message signs and control roadside video cameras. The 
ATMS and ATMSR contain an event management application that monitors incidents 
and provides operators with incident response plans that are used to manage incidents 
in real time. 
As Caltrans transitions to the CATMS, the capabilities of ATMS and ATMSR will be 
integrated into a more unified, scalable, and future-proof platform that standardizes 
statewide operations while remaining adaptable to emerging technologies and data 
sources. 
Intelligent Roadway Information System 
The Intelligent Roadway Information System (IRIS) monitors the highway system and 
roadside weather systems. IRIS also controls field devices such as CMS and roadside 
cameras. 
Active Intelligent Transportation System 
Active ITS allows operators to show multiple camera feeds on the application. The user 
can adjust the camera angle, zoom, and IRIS. The user can also show multiple cameras 
on the same screen, creating a video wall. Active ITS also allows you to make a slide 
show (tour) showing new cameras for a set amount of time. Another use of this system is 
the ability to change dynamic message sign (DMS) messages with approved terms. 
DMS signs can also be grouped to show the same message. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-51 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
Personal Computer Data Concentrators 
Personal computer data concentrators provide the ATMS with the ability to interact with 
field equipment, including VDS, ramp metering systems, multi-lane metering systems, 
and extinguishable message sign devices. 
Camera Control System 
Camera control systems are used to monitor traffic and confirm incidents using ITS 
software and CCTV field elements. 
Fog Detection and Warning System 
Fog detection and warning systems consist of visibility sensors, speed detectors, and 
cameras used to detect congestion and visibility problems that could affect driver and 
passenger safety. 
Topic 3 Field Traffic Management System Elements 
Closed-Circuit Television 
CCTV relays video images from cameras along the highways to the TMC and web 
applications (such as the Caltrans CCTV Map). The TMC uses cameras to assist with 
verifying traffic incident details and roadway operating conditions. On occasion, 
cameras can serve as the initial source to detect an incident. 
Video images from CCTV cameras are used to assess the cause and status of non-
recurrent traffic congestion, verify the existence and location of traffic incidents, and 
monitor the status of recurrent traffic congestion. Video images reliably and consistently 
provide detailed information on roadway conditions to help determine the proper 
traffic management response and mitigate congestion. Expediting incident details and 
removal reduces the potential for secondary incidents and enhances safety and 
security. CCTV camera video images also enable TMC operations personnel to 
immediately provide timely and accurate traffic information to the motoring public. 
Changeable Message Signs 
CMSs perform a critical role on highways by advising drivers of real-time roadway 
conditions and, in some cases, a suggested course of action as well. CMSs can reduce 
traffic congestion and delays and improve traveler safety. For more information on 
CMSs, please refer to the Changeable Message Sign (CMS) Guidelines. 
CMSs manage traffic by displaying early warnings, advisories, and alternate route 
messages. These messages perform the following functions: 
• Advisory messages provide motorists with useful information about a specific 
roadway condition impacting travel along the route where the CMS is located. 
This information enables motorists to consider alternate routes to reach their 
destination. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-52 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
   
   
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
• Alternate route messages influence drivers to travel to their chosen destination 
using different routes than originally selected. Travelers are alerted to the 
roadway conditions ahead and encouraged to use an available alternate 
route, or in severe cases, notified that an alternate route must be used. Alternate 
route messages can also be used in addressing reduced capacity due to 
unusual conditions. 
• Early warning messages effectively reduce secondary incidents by giving 
travelers advance notice of traffic slowing or "queuing" ahead. This reduces rear-
end incidents by approaching traffic. 
To be effective, CMSs must provide timely, accurate, and reliable information. The signs 
should be activated when unexpected conditions require specific driver actions, such 
as reducing speed, changing lanes, or using alternate routes. 
CMSs shall only display information that meets the following criteria: 
• Timely, accurate, and reliable. 
• Related to traffic, roadway, or weather conditions. 
• Associated with unexpected conditions or non-recurrent congestion. 
Highway Advisory Radio 
HAR messages are a way for Caltrans to provide travel-related information to motorists 
through standard amplitude modulation receivers. HAR messages consist of warnings, 
advisories, directions, or other information useful to motorists. HAR messages are 
transmitted from low-power roadside radio transmitters, which can be permanent or 
mobile. The broadcasts are relatively short, usually less than a minute. Appropriate signs 
advise motorists approaching a HAR site on where to set the radio dial to receive the 
message. 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations restrict the locations 
of all HAR transmitters. Messages can be recorded for continuous repetition, with the 
message length adjusted to permit a motorist to hear at least two full repetitions while 
passing through the zone of coverage at maximum speed. The agency operating the 
HAR system is responsible for monitoring and maintaining the system and changing the 
message content as the situation warrants it. 
FCC rules allow HAR messages to contain non-commercial voice information about 
traffic and road conditions, traffic obstructions, travel advisories, directions, availability 
of motorist services, and descriptions of special events. Note that it is not permissible to 
identify the names of commercial businesses whose services may be available within 
the broadcast coverage area. When emergency conditions exist, emergency 
instructions are broadcast describing the road and traffic conditions and providing 
information to the motorist regarding appropriate actions. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-53 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
HARs in the vicinity of major construction zones describe the type of work being done, 
give applicable traffic control restrictions, and may also recommend alternate routes 
when applicable. 
Ramp Metering 
Entry control metering (commonly referred to as ramp metering) is a traffic 
management tool used primarily to combat peak-period recurrent highway 
congestion. 
Ramp metering is used on high-volume traffic corridors. The purpose of ramp metering is 
to adjust the highway traffic volume to less than the amount that would disrupt the 
highway flow. Ramp metering uses traffic signals to limit the number of vehicles per hour 
entering the highway from an entrance ramp. Entry ramp metering is occasionally used 
on direct connectors between highways. Vehicles are released one or two at a time in 
each entrance ramp lane. Vehicles are spaced at intervals as they enter the outside 
lane of the downstream facility. Depending on volume, this spacing may enable 
vehicles to merge with through traffic without severely impacting the speed of vehicles 
in the through lane. 
Ramp meter locations consist of field controllers, detection equipment, traffic signal 
heads, and warning signs and are generally connected to a central processing control 
system. This central system monitors individual ramps and the mainline highway using 
loop detectors or other detecting equipment in each lane. Ramp meter signals are 
activated when the traffic volume reaches a threshold volume or the speed drops to a 
predetermined level. Metering systems attempt to limit the number of vehicles on the 
highway to a number slightly less than the breakdown level. During peak periods, ramp 
metering personnel may activate and deactivate ramp meters at selected highway 
on-ramps, based on unusual traffic conditions. When there is an incident on a highway, 
TMC operations personnel may need to interact with ramp metering personnel to 
determine if any adjustments to the metering rates would improve traffic flow in 
response to the incident. At times, there may be a report of a ramp meter that is not 
phasing and is "stuck on red." If the meter is accessible through ATMS, the TMC operator 
may turn off the ramp meter until field personnel can respond. 
Signalized Intersections 
An additional traffic management tool available to TMCs is the State Traffic Signal 
Control System. In locations where the traffic signal field controllers are tied into the TMC 
(or elsewhere within the district office) through remote communications, TMCs should 
consider the option to modify or temporarily adjust traffic signal timing (or phasing) in 
response to incidents. In general, traffic signal operations personnel need to be 
contacted to initiate adjustments to the State Traffic Signal Control System. If the 
incident response would benefit from signal timing adjustments on adjoining local 
streets, a State Traffic Signal Control System representative stationed within the TMC 
should coordinate with local agency traffic signal operations staff. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-54 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
   
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
Roadside Weather Information System 
The Roadside Weather Information System (RWIS) utilizes meteorological measurement 
stations strategically positioned alongside highways to collect local pavement and 
atmospheric data. Each RWIS station utilizes sensing devices that are placed in the 
highway subgrade, on the road surface, and above the roadway on towers (some as 
tall as 33 feet high). At the tower’s height, weather data such as air temperature, 
precipitation, and wind speed are measured and collected. Road sensors are used to 
determine if the roadway surface is wet, dry, frosted, snow-covered, or iced. Some 
stations utilize video cameras to relay visual information about weather and road 
conditions, such as fog, rain, and snow. 
RWIS information allows traffic operations and maintenance staff to make more 
informed decisions during winter storms. RWIS equipment and computer programs 
monitor air and pavement temperature to forecast how winter storms may impact 
highways. 
The information RWIS sends to TMCs also assists with dispatching, activating CMSs or 
HARs with preselected messages, and updating websites with current roadway 
condition information for motorists. 
Extinguishable Message Signs 
An extinguishable message sign provides motorists with a clearly visible fixed message. 
This strategically placed sign improves overall safety by providing motorists with 
pertinent roadside information or warnings. Extinguishable message signs (EMS) are 
used to display a fixed message, such as “TUNE RADIO TO 1610 AM” or “ALL TRUCKS EXIT 
AT SCALES.” Another type of EMS is a roadside sign, which displays fixed messages with 
flashing beacons to draw attention to the activated sign. 
Integrated Corridor Management 
TMC floor staff can activate, store, retrieve, and execute congestion management 
plans for ICM. For example, they can automatically determine ramp metering timing 
rates and recommend signal timing patterns across the corridor. 
Reversible Lane Control 
Reversible lanes, also known as variable lanes, are shared lanes that accommodate 
peak-period traffic flow. The direction of traveling traffic in shared lanes changes 
depending on the time and day of the week. 
Reversible lanes must be considered for projects, as mandated by California Streets 
and Highways Code, Section 100.15. 
Reversible lane duties include: 
• Activating and deactivating fixed CMSs during a barrier move. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-55 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
    
     
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4 Systems and Tools February 2026 
• Raising and lowering roadway candlesticks for lane delineation using the 
electronic lane control system. 
• Turning roadway in-pavement lights on or off for lane delineation using the 
electronic lane control system. 
• Changing electronic message signs and variable message signs in the vicinity of 
the candlesticks. 
• Confirming all above actions with field maintenance personnel over an 800-
Megahertz (MHz) radio. 
Topic 4 External Interfaces 
California Highway Patrol Media Computer-Aided Dispatch 
TMCs primarily receive incident information details by monitoring the CHP VisiCAD or 
CHP MediaCAD terminal. Added information may be received directly from CHP 
dispatch to help verify the incident by coordinating with the TMC liaison officer. The 
CHP communications center will issue Sigalerts and coordinate with the TMC by 
obtaining incident details and the status of response efforts at the incident scene. 
Additional details on traffic conditions and incident information can be obtained from 
CHP personnel by monitoring CHP radio scanners at the TMC. 
The CHP VisiCAD system is a system that CHP uses to monitor and dispatch 911 calls and 
officer resources. The Media CHP Traffic Incident Information website, as well as the 
site’s XML feed, allow the public to view live and recent incident information. The CHP 
MediaCAD website filters incident information and does not display all incidents 
reported by CHP to protect private and confidential information. Although heavily 
redacted for privacy and operational purposes, MediaCAD is publicly available and 
does not require special permissions. It serves as the public-facing version of CHP 
VisiCAD, allowing access to information about conditions on the SHS without disclosing 
sensitive or critical incident management details. 
VisiCAD 
VisiCAD is a CHP system accessible to most TMCs that does not filter incidents or 
incident details and contains private and confidential information such as CHP unit 
location(s), statuses, and private citizen vehicle and contact information. This allows the 
TMC floor staff to access more incident details on demand. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 110-56 
T
raffic Operations Manual 
        
     
   
    
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
Section 5 Transportation Management Center 
Facility Management 
Topic 1 Overview 
The TMC is a critical facility. The TMC facility manager plays a key role in maintaining the 
TMC facility and working areas to facilitate TMC operations. This includes ensuring the 
facility meets health and safety requirements, assisting with preventative maintenance, 
managing tenants, overseeing contractors and vendors, ensuring accessibility, and 
communicating with stakeholders such as DGS, CHP, and others. The roles and 
responsibilities of the facility manager include: 
• Ensuring the facility is operational and compliant with all local and state laws 
and regulations relating to health and safety. 
• Providing facility maintenance, operations, and repairs in an efficient, cost-
effective, and expeditious manner. 
• Ensuring uniformity of the furnishings throughout the TMC. Caltrans and CHP will 
coordinate the selection of colors, styles, and materials. Each party is responsible 
for purchasing replacement furniture for their portion of the facility. 
Five out of the twelve TMCs (Districts 3, 7, 8, 11, and 12) are standalone facilities 
independent of the district Caltrans offices. Caltrans and CHP are co-located at these 
facilities. Caltrans and CHP have an interagency agreement establishing fiscal 
obligations, roles, and responsibilities of both departments toward the development, 
maintenance, and operation of these five TMC facilities. Caltrans has agreed to 
develop the building infrastructure and maintain the facilities through a dedicated 
facility manager, with CHP sharing the financial requirements. Facility managers at 
these five TMCs are responsible for implementing the interagency agreement with CHP, 
managing numerous contracts associated with facility interior and exterior needs, 
procurements, and other responsibilities. 
For the remaining seven TMCs that are located within the district office buildings and 
the satellite TMC located at Kingvale Station, both Caltrans and DGS provide facility 
management support. This support is typically limited to exterior and interior building 
maintenance services, such as carpet and flooring, heating, ventilation, air 
conditioning (HVAC), workstations, furniture and cabinets, and roofing. TMC functional 
managers or delegated staff manage internal TMC operating systems, terminals, and 
associated infrastructure procurement, installation, and maintenance. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-57 
        
     
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
  
    
   
  
 
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
Topic 2 Tenants or Partners Present in the 
Transportation Management Center 
TMCs enable highway traffic monitoring and management functions, which include 
incident management, emergency response coordination, and more. This is a 
multidivisional and multiagency collaborative effort, and thus, representatives of 
different divisions and agencies involved in these efforts may be located or work at 
TMCs as needed. This includes CHP, local law enforcement, CalOES, DGS, Caltrans 
Division of Maintenance, EOC, Office of Radio Communications, and mobile 
communication companies. 
In addition to the TMC floor where all operations are performed, TMC facilities may 
have additional spaces for resting, showers, eating, and a wellness center to meet the 
needs of employees working extended shifts. Facility managers manage the use of 
these working spaces with CHP and other agencies working at the TMC. 
Topic 3 Facility Manager Responsibilities 
Facility managers are responsible for performing and coordinating several tasks. While 
these vary across the state, the following is a list of tasks and activities that the facility 
manager is responsible for or supports: 
All Transportation Management Centers 
• Support the TMC functional manager with workspace needs. 
• Facilitate all building or equipment requests and changes. 
• Manage applicable permits, licenses, and regulations for building operations. 
• Conduct mailbox, floor plan, and space evaluations. 
• Maintain building evacuation plans. 
• Manage fleet, parking, and lighting. 
• Maintain rack and vault space. 
• Supervise the tower and the Office of Radio Communications. 
• Maintain HVAC, generators, and other equipment. 
• Maintain the building’s exterior and interior workspaces. 
• Ensure basic health and sanitation services are available. 
Standalone Transportation Management Centers 
In addition to general tasks for all TMCs, facility managers for standalone TMCs may also 
perform the following tasks: 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-58 
        
     
   
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
    
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
• Onboard new employees, collect fingerprints, coordinate entrance form 
completion, and assign employee keys, cards, mailboxes, desks, and phone 
lines. 
• Ensure Caltrans staff leaving the TMC complete the exit form and return keys, 
cards, and any other state property. 
• Develop, monitor, and manage budget operating expenses, annual reviews, life 
cycle costs, and five-year plans. 
• Post notifications and memos, as necessary. 
• Conduct security, clearance, and access activities, camera review, and 
reporting. 
• Provide phone, telecommunications, and network support. 
• Maintain inventory, property control, logs, and as-built or plan management. 
• Track bi-decade and benchmark due dates on equipment. 
• Process monthly billing for the interagency agreement with CHP and invoices on 
contracts with other facility vendors and service providers. 
• Purchase custodial supplies, building equipment, office supplies, and other items. 
• Manage maintenance and service contracts as needed. 
Contracts Managed by the Transportation Management Center 
Facility Manager 
Maintenance and service needs vary for each of the five standalone TMC facilities. 
Many facility maintenance services are secured through contracts. The following is a list 
of service contracts that facility managers maintain to support building operational 
needs: 
• Roof maintenance and repair. 
• Elevator maintenance and repair. 
• Electrical, switchgear, and power maintenance and repair. 
• Generator maintenance and repair, and generator panel monitoring. 
• Mechanical system maintenance and repair. 
• Fire suppression system monitoring, maintenance, and repair. 
• Window and interior cleaning. 
• Batteries and uninterrupted power systems maintenance and repair. 
• Video and camera system maintenance and repair. 
• Access system maintenance and repair. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-59 
        
     
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
• Designated underground storage tank operation. 
• Plumbing. 
• Air handlers and chiller maintenance. 
• Refuse, recycling, and compost. 
• Hydronic boiler. 
• Building and restroom sanitation services. 
• Closed-loop water treatment. 
• Pest control. 
• Remote alarm monitoring service. 
• Gates maintenance. 
• Locksmith services. 
• Landscaping. 
• Drinking water service. 
• Fire devices (updates and upgrades). 
• E-waste services. 
• Moving and installation services. 
• Door and glass. 
• Data cleaning services. 
• Vertical and roller blind repair. 
• Upholstery (wall panels) and furniture repair. 
• Metal restoration (exterior) and marquee. 
• Window and vinyl seal repair. 
• Floor mat service. 
• HVAC system maintenance and repair. 
• Drain system. 
• Security camera system updates, upgrades, and maintenance. 
• Dispatch consoles. 
• Gas line. 
• Sewage line. 
• Phone system. 
• Carpet cleaning. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-60 
        
     
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
• Scaffolding and flapper. 
• Painting services. 
Maintenance Schedule 
Maintenance task schedules vary for each TMC facility based on their infrastructure 
type, age, location, and other factors. The following is a typical schedule provided for 
reference: 
Daily 
• Building temperature monitoring and adjustment. 
• DGS building systems monitoring. 
• Custodial. 
• Grounds and building rounds. 
Weekly 
• Landscaping. 
• Garbage and recycling (twice a week). 
• Restroom sanitation system maintenance. 
Monthly 
• Pest control service. 
• Elevator service. 
• Fire suppression, alarm monitoring, and alarm service. 
• Generator and switchgear monitoring and service. 
• Emergency battery monitoring. 
• Underground storage tank monitoring and service. 
• Gate maintenance. 
• Audio-visual equipment monitoring. 
• Operating Expenses and Pending Expenses Report. 
• CHP Payment Review and Charge Report. 
• Tenant location map updates. 
Quarterly 
• Carpet cleaning. 
• Closed-loop water treatment testing. 
• Preventative plumbing maintenance. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-61 
        
     
   
  
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
• Emergency battery service. 
Every Six Months 
• Plumbing services on lines and in the basement. 
• Generator and switchgear testing and maintenance. 
• Fire suppression testing. 
• External window washing. 
• Underground storage tank test and maintenance. 
• Internal door service and maintenance. 
• Restroom deep cleaning. 
• Data cleaning service. 
Annually 
• Roof membrane review and repairs on warranty. 
• Solar review and cleaning on warranty. 
• Elevator permit renewal. 
• Fire system testing and maintenance. 
• Generator and switchgear testing, maintenance, and permit. 
• Generator exhaust permit. 
• Camera and reader software upgrade. 
• Underground diesel tank permits and tests. 
• Door and lock preventative maintenance. 
• Plumbing jetting and basement pipe exam. 
• Air handler testing and maintenance. 
• Spring tree and landscape health exam and planting. 
• Spring internal window and sill cleaning. 
• Boiler maintenance. 
• Roller blinds service and repairs. 
Every Three Years 
• Source testing generator engine. 
Every Five Years 
• Check window strips and seals. 
• Replace backup batteries. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-62 
        
     
   
  
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Section 5 Transportation Management Center Facility Management February 2026 
• Re-grout restrooms. 
• Arc flash evaluation. 
• Purchase emergency water and meals ready to eat. 
Topic 4 Contract Procurement Resources for Facility 
Managers 
Contact Caltrans Division of Procurement and Contracts for information on how to 
complete purchases or contracts. The following is a list of additional contract and 
procurement educational resources: 
• New ADM-0360 Service Contract Process 
• Contract Manager’s Handbook 
• Form ADM-4033, "Contract Manager Checklist for IFB & IFPQ Contract Requests" 
Non-IT Service Contracts - Training & Resources 
Topic 5 Facility Security 
The normal business hours for general access to TMC buildings are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 
p.m. on weekdays. The facility has restricted access to only authorized personnel 
outside these hours. Building security is provided 24 hours a day. During normal business 
hours, TMCs can be accessed through “all employee” entrances. The TMC operations 
center is a secure facility. Only authorized personnel with proper security clearance are 
permitted access through the electronic security system. Parking for staff assigned to 
the TMC is provided in designated parking areas. 
In addition to following departmental policy and procedures for identification badges 
and facility security desks, TMC personnel with unescorted access to the TMC operating 
floor where CHP VisiCAD is accessible are subject to DOJ background checks and 
fingerprinting as described in Section 1, Topic 7, “Security Clearance for Transportation 
Management Center Personnel and Visitors Policy.” The commanding CHP officer at 
the TMC has the authority and responsibility to ensure compliance with DOJ security 
rules and regulations. 
Chapter 110 Transportation Management Centers 
Traffic Operations Manual 
110-63 